A Mixed Integer Linear Program for the Rapid
Transit Network Design Problem with Static
Modal Competition
Gabriel Gutiérrez-Jarpa1 , Gilbert Laporte2 ,
Vladimir Marianov3 , and Luigi Moccia4

1    School of Industrial Engineering, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Valparaíso,
     Chile
     gabriel.gutierrez@ucv.cl
2    HEC Montréal, Canada
     gilbert.laporte@cirrelt.ca
3    Department of Electrical Engineering, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile,
     Chile
     marianov@ing.puc.cl
4    Istituto di Calcolo e Reti ad Alte Prestazioni, Consiglio Nazionale delle
     Ricerche, Italy
     moccia@icar.cnr.it


      Abstract
In recent years, several models and algorithms have been put forward for the design of metro
networks (see e.g. [1], [7], [2], and [6]). Here we extend the rapid transit network design problem
(RTNDP) of [4] by introducing modal competition and by enriching its multi-objective framework.
In that reference an origin-destination flow is considered as captured by rapid transit if some
stations are sufficiently close to both the origin and the destination of the flow. We observe
that by maximizing the captured traffic using this criterion results in improving access, i.e. the
number of commuters who could benefit from the rapid transit network for their daily trips. This
is indeed a relevant goal in urban transit, but on its own it does not adequately reflect modal
choices. In this talk we consider a traffic flow as captured if the travel time (or equivalently the
generalized cost) by rapid transit is less than by car, i.e. an “all or nothing” criterion. This feature
has been neglected in most previous discrete mathematical programs because considering origin-
destination flows results in models that are too large for realistic instances. As observed by [8],
considering traffic flows requires a multi-commodity formulation, where each flow is considered as
a distinct commodity. This was the approach taken by [5], but it only allowed the solution of very
small instances. We introduce a methodology that overcomes this difficulty by exploiting a pre-
assigned topological configuration. As explained by [1], a pre-assigned topological configuration
is in itself a positive feature for planners since it incorporates their knowledge of the traffic flows
in cities and corresponds to what is often done in practice. We note that a metro network is
typically built incrementally starting from a simple layout. Very often planners identify a few
major corridors that should be privileged for an initial metro configuration or for later extensions.
Geographical constraints may also limit the number options. We remark that, despite the simple
layouts, the high number of location choices for each layout renders the problem hard. The
precise alignment of metro lines within these corridors can be optimized by using a methodology
such as the one we propose. The basic topological configurations we consider are not limitative
in the sense that our approach will work with any basic layout. We note, however, that simple
layouts such as stars and triangles exist in several networks (e.g. Minsk and Prague). With time
the basic networks evolve into more complex, but still common configurations. [10] find that
metro networks converge to a shape characterized by a core from which quasi-one-dimensional
branches grow and reach out to areas of the city further from it. We discuss relevant goals of
rapid transit planning, and we propose a multi-objective model conducive to a post-optimization
            © Gabriel Gutiérrez-Jarpa, Gilbert Laporte, Vladimir Marianov, and Luigi Moccia;
            licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY
15th Workshop on Algorithmic Approaches for Transportation Modelling, Optimization, and Systems (ATMOS’15).
Editors: Giuseppe F. Italiano and Marie Schmidt; pp. 95–96
                    OpenAccess Series in Informatics
                    Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
96   A Mixed Integer Linear Program for the Rapid Transit Network Design Problem


     analysis for effectiveness, efficiency, and equity concerns. The multi-objective framework works
     with two alternative measure of effectiveness under a budget constraint, and a post-optimization
     phase is suggested to assess efficiency and equity trade-offs, an issue rarely considered in transit
     planning (see for example [3] for a review of equity in location problems, and [9] for a discussion
     of equity in urban transit). We show that our approach can be applied to realistic situations and
     we illustrate it on data from Concepción, Chile.

     1998 ACM Subject Classification Decision support

     Keywords and phrases metro network design, multi-objective optimization, modal competition

     Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/OASIcs.ATMOS.2015.95

     Category Short Paper

     Acknowledgements. Gabriel Gutiérrez-Jarpa was supported by FONDECYT project No.
     1130878 and Becas Chile. Gilbert Laporte was supported by the Canadian Natural Sciences
     and Engineering Research Council under grant 39682-10. Vladimir Marianov was partially
     supported by the Complex Engineering Systems institute, through grants ICM-MIDEPLAN
     P-05-004-F and CONICYT FB016. Luigi Moccia was partially supported by the CNR (Italy)
     under STM-2014 and STM-2015 grants. These supports are gratefully acknowledged.

           References
      1   G. Bruno and G. Laporte. An interactive decision support system for the design of rapid
          public transit networks. INFOR, 40(2):111–118, 2002.
      2   D. Canca, A. De-Los-Santos, G. Laporte, and J. A. Mesa. A general rapid network design,
          line planning and fleet investment integrated model. Annals of Operations Research, In
          Press:1–18, 2014.
      3   H. A. Eiselt and G. Laporte. Objectives in location problems. In Z. Drezner, editor, Facility
          Location: A Survey of Applications and Methods, Springer Series in Operations Research
          and Financial Engineering, chapter 8, pages 151–180. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1995.
      4   G. Gutiérrez-Jarpa, C. Obreque, G. Laporte, and V. Marianov. Rapid transit network
          design for optimal cost and origin-destination demand capture. Computers & Operations
          Research, 40(12):3000–3009, 2013.
      5   G. Laporte, A. Marín, J. A. Mesa, and F. Perea. Designing robust rapid transit networks
          with alternative routes. Journal of Advanced Transportation, 45(1):54–65, 2011.
      6   G. Laporte and J. A. Mesa. The design of rapid transit networks. In G. Laporte, S. Nickel,
          and F. Saldanha da Gama, editors, Location Science, pages 581–594. Springer, Berlin,
          Heidelberg, 2015.
      7   G. Laporte, J. A. Mesa, F. A. Ortega, and I. Sevillano. Maximizing trip coverage in the
          location of a single rapid transit alignment. Annals of Operations Research, 136(1):49–63,
          2005.
      8   Á. Marín and R. García-Ródenas. Location of infrastructure in urban railway networks.
          Computers & Operations Research, 36(5):1461–1477, 5 2009.
      9   A. Perugia, J.-F. Cordeau, G. Laporte, and L. Moccia. Designing a home-to-work bus ser-
          vice in a metropolitan area. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 45(10):1710–
          1726, 2011.
     10   C. Roth, S. M. Kang, M. Batty, and M. Barthelemy. A long-time limit for world subway
          networks. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 9(75):2540–2550, 2012.
