           sustainability

Article
Design of Urban Rail Transit Network Constrained by
Urban Road Network, Trips and
Land-Use Characteristics
Shushan Chai * , Qinghuai Liang and Simin Zhong
 School of Civil Engineering, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China; qhliang@bjtu.edu.cn (Q.L.);
 16121224@bjtu.edu.cn (S.Z.)
 * Correspondence: sschai@bjtu.edu.cn
                                                                                                        
 Received: 1 September 2019; Accepted: 1 November 2019; Published: 3 November 2019                      


 Abstract: In the process of urban rail transit network design, the urban road network, urban trips and
 land use are the key factors to be considered. At present, the subjective and qualitative methods are
 usually used in most practices. In this paper, a quantitative model is developed to ensure the matching
 between the factors and the urban rail transit network. In the model, a basic network, which is used
 to define the roads that candidate lines will pass through, is firstly constructed based on the locations
 of large traffic volume and main passenger flow corridors. Two matching indexes are proposed: one
 indicates the matching degree between the network and the trip demand, which is calculated by the
 deviation value between two gravity centers of the stations’ importance distribution in network and
 the traffic zones’ trip intensity; the other one describes the matching degree between the network and
 the land use, which is calculated by the deviation value between the fractal dimensions of stations’
 importance distribution and the traffic zones’ land-use intensity. The model takes the maximum traffic
 turnover per unit length of network and the minimum average volume of transfer passengers between
 lines as objectives. To solve the NP-hard problem in which the variables increase exponentially with
 the increase of network size, a neighborhood search algorithm is developed based on simulated
 annealing method. A real case study is carried out to show that the model and algorithm are effective.

 Keywords: urban rail transit; network design; urban characteristics; neighborhood search




1. Introduction
      As the backbone of an urban transit system, urban rail transit plays an important role in urban
development. A reasonable urban rail transit network can not only ensure the efficiency of urban
passenger transport but also promote the sustainable development of a city. The network design,
which will determine the structure and the overall layout of the network, is the most important stage
in urban rail transit planning. How to meet the urban development characteristics in this stage is an
important question.
      Urban rail transit network design can be affected by many factors, such as urban space, structure
and layout, passenger demand, society and economy, environmental impact, and policy, etc., and
it is complicated to quantify the factors simultaneously, so subjective and qualitative methods are
usually used in most practices of network design. With the development of computer technology
and the application of mathematical methods, nowadays planners and researchers are gradually
employing quantitative models in transit network design. Among them, a symmetrical urban spatial
structure model was proposed by Fielbaum et al. [1]. Based on the city model, four transit network
structures (direct lines, feeder-trunk, hub and spoke, and exclusive lines) were calculated by Fielbaum
et al. [2] to identify the applicability to the urban structure. But the network designed by this method


Sustainability 2019, 11, 6128; doi:10.3390/su11216128                         www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6128                                                                         2 of 23



is too idealized and theorized to determine specific passenger corridors, line alignments, and station
locations for a real city. In view of the environmental impact, a multi-objective model, which takes the
minimum off-gas emissions and the minimum travel time as objectives, was formulated by Zhang [3].
With the model, the network with environment-friendly characteristics can be obtained. In view
of the risk management policy, some risk-averse strategies (minimization of the maximum regret,
value-at-risk measures) were introduced to the rail transit network design problem by Cadarso [4].
For each strategy, an optimization model with the objective of minimum risk impact was established.
But the models considered the effects of each strategy separately rather than synthetically. For the
quantitative methods of rail transit network design, mathematical programming is most commonly
used. During the optimization process, the planning objectives determined by construction and service
requirements include maximizing the benefits of operators [5–8], users [9] or both [10–13]. For research
projects, the rail transit design can be classified as the design of a new rail transit network and the
expansion of an existing rail transit network [14].
      Among the influencing factors, the urban characteristics of road network, trips and land use are
the most relevant, basic and important factors with the urban rail transit network, which should be
given priority consideration. On one hand, as a kind of mass and punctual transit, urban rail transit
can greatly improve the travel convenience for passengers and change the mode sharing of urban
trips [14,15]. On the other hand, land use value along the lines and around the stations can be greatly
improved with the impact of urban rail transit, which can effectively guide the rapid development
of the city [16,17]. Therefore, in this paper, a quantitative model, which takes into account the urban
characteristics simultaneously and is applicable to real cities is developed while the cities were generally
regarded as connected graphs in most previous research.
      In the model, a generation method of a basic network, which takes into account the matching
between the generated network and the urban road network, is proposed. Two matching indexes are
introduced to the constraints: one indicates the matching degree between the network and the urban
trips, the other indicates the matching degree between the network and the land use. The model takes
the maximum transport efficiency of the network and the maximum travel convenience for passengers
as objectives, which stands in the perspective of both managers and users. Due to the high complexity,
solving this type of model has been proved to be an NP-hard problem [6,9,18], which means that as the
network size increases, the variables increases exponentially. So a neighborhood search algorithm for a
real-size network is developed based on a simulated annealing method in the paper.
      The structure of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the determination of the
matching indexes between the urban rail transit network and the urban characteristics. Section 3
presents the multi-objective network design model, followed by the solving algorithm in Section 4.
Section 5 presents the real-world case calculation and analysis. Section 6 presents the conclusions.

2. Determination of Matching Indexes
     In the quantitative model, the urban road network, trips and land use are the key factors to be
considered. The basic network, which connects the locations of large traffic volume and covers the
passenger flow corridors, will be determined to ensure the matching between the rail transit network
and the urban road network. Two indexes will be proposed to evaluate quantitatively the matching
degrees between the rail transit network and the urban trips, and similarly between the rail transit
network and the land use.
     The determined basic network, the calculated matching indexes, the given candidate stations,
the passenger demand, etc. are all used as inputs of the model. While generating the network, the
matching degrees will be constrained in a suitable range, and the line alignments will be bounded in
the basic network. It should be noted that only some of the candidate stations will be selected as the
actual stations according to the principle of optimization. After iterations, a network that meets the
constraints and has the optimal objective will be obtained.
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6128                                                                        3 of 23



2.1. Structural Importance of Stations

2.1.1. Evaluation Indexes
     The structural importance of a station refers to the importance of its position in the topological
network. In this paper, the urban rail transit network is regarded as a complex network, and the
degree centrality, the closeness centrality and the betweenness centrality [19,20] of the nodes in
the complex network are used to describe the structural importance of the stations from different
dimensions, respectively.
     The degree centrality DCi of station i reflects the direct relevance between the station i and other
stations. The larger the value, the closer the relationship between the station and other stations in
the network. Assuming that DCt , DCm and DCe are the index values of transfer station, intermediate
station and terminal station respectively, they satisfy DCt > DCm > DCe . In the undirected graph
network, DCi is calculated by Equation (1):

                                                          ki
                                                 DCi =                                                  (1)
                                                         n−1
where ki is the degree value of station i, which is defined as the number of edges connected to the
station i. n is the number of stations in the network.
     The closeness centrality CCi of a station i reflects the convenience of arriving at the station i from
other stations. The larger the closeness centrality value, the greater the extent to which the station i
resides in the center of the network, and the shorter the average distance from other stations to the
station i. CCi is calculated by Equation (2):

                                                         n−1
                                                 CCi =   n
                                                                                                        (2)
                                                         P
                                                           dij
                                                         j=1

where dij is the length of shortest path between station i and station j.
      In the urban rail transit network, the station i with high betweenness centrality BCi plays a key
role in the transit of passenger flow, which reflects the bridging function in the connection between
other stations. The larger the index, the more the number of travel paths passing through the station.
BCi is calculated by Equation (3):

                                                       2       X ni
                                                                     st
                                         BCi =                                                          (3)
                                                 (n − 1)(n − 2) s,t gst

where gst is the number of shortest paths that have the same and the shortest length between stations s
and t, nist is the number of paths included in gst and passing through the station i.
     In order to coordinate the multi-dimensional importance of station i in the network topology, a
comprehensive importance evaluation index Ii is proposed, as shown in Equation (4):

                                         Ii = w1 DCi + w2 CCi + w3 BCi                                  (4)

where Ii is the comprehensive importance degree of station i in the network structure, w1 , w2 , and w3
are the weights of the structural indexes from different dimensions.
     With the index Ii , the importance of station i in the topological network can be evaluated
comprehensively, reflecting the status of the station in the network structure. In the following section,
Ii will be used to calculate the structural characteristics of an urban rail transit network. For the
convenience of expression, the importance of the stations mentioned below refers to the comprehensive
structural importance in the network.
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6128                                                                                             4 of 23
Sustainability 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                4 of 23

       Gravity
2.1.2.The          Center
            position         of Distribution
                        status  of a station reflected by its structural importance in the network is the result
        connection
of theThe               form of
            position status     ofthe   network
                                    a station       structure
                                               reflected             its position.
                                                                 at structural
                                                             by its                   Therefore,inthe
                                                                                   importance      thestructural
                                                                                                         network is form
                                                                                                                       the of the
                                                                                                                           result
network     can  be  characterized      by  the  distribution     of  the stations    with different
of the connection form of the network structure at its position. Therefore, the structural form of theimportance.
      If the
network       importance
            can               degree by
                 be characterized       of athe
                                              station            of theasstations
                                                        is regarded
                                                 distribution               its ‘gravity’,  the moreimportance.
                                                                                      with different    important the station
      If more
is, the          ‘gravity’ itdegree
         the importance         has inof the  network.
                                           a station       In this paper,
                                                                        as itsfollowing
                                                        is regarded             ‘gravity’, the  calculation
                                                                                            the more   importantprinciple  of the
                                                                                                                     the station
gravity    center   in   physics,    the  concept     of  gravity     center   of   stations’ importance
is, the more ‘gravity’ it has in the network. In this paper, following the calculation principle of the       in  a  network    is
proposed.
gravity       An in
          center   urban    rail transit
                      physics,            network
                                 the concept          is usually
                                                of gravity    centerregarded      as aimportance
                                                                       of stations’    planar network.     If the stations
                                                                                                   in a network             with
                                                                                                                    is proposed.
different   importance       are  assigned    to certain    values    and  locations,    the distribution
An urban rail transit network is usually regarded as a planar network. If the stations with different        of stations  can  be
expressed     in  the  form    of scatter   in the   network.     The   equilibrium      gravity  point
importance are assigned to certain values and locations, the distribution of stations can be expressed in of the  scatter  in the
planar
the  formtopological
            of scatter innetwork     is the gravity
                            the network.               center ofgravity
                                             The equilibrium        the stations’
                                                                             point importance
                                                                                     of the scatterdistribution,
                                                                                                    in the planaras    shown in
                                                                                                                     topological
Figure   1.  In Figure    1,
network is the gravity center G A , G of  and    G
                                       B the stations’
                                                   C  are   the ‘gravity’    of  station  A, B and   C,  respectively,
                                                          importance distribution, as shown in Figure 1. In Figure       and the1,
point
G       O S isGthe
  A , GB and
                    gravity center. The calculation method of the coordinates of O is shown in
               C are the ‘gravity’ of station A, B and C, respectively, and the point OSS is the gravity
        The(5)–(6):
Equations
center.      calculation method of the coordinates of OS is shown in Equations (5)–(6):
                                                                 n

                                                                PxxIi Ii
                                                                  n
                                                                        i i
                                                               ii=1n 1
                                                         xx11 =                                                             (5)
                                                                                                                             (5)
                                                                  PIiI
                                                                      n
                                                                 i 1
                                                                          i
                                                                  i=1
                                                                 n

                                                                Pn yyIi Ii
                                                                        i i
                                                          y  ii=1 1                                                       (6)
                                                         y11 = nn                                                            (6)
                                                                  PI i
                                                                 i 1
                                                                      Ii
                                                                  i=1
where (x( x11,,yy1) isisthe
where                         coordinatepair
                         thecoordinate     pairof
                                                ofthe
                                                   thegravitygravitycenter       ofstations’
                                                                          centerof            importance,n nis the
                                                                                    stations’importance,        is the number
                                                                                                                    number of
                 1
stations in urban
of stations    in urban  railrail
                              transit network,
                                  transit       (xi , (yxi i), is
                                          network,             yi )theiscoordinate   pair pair
                                                                         the coordinate   of station i.
                                                                                               of station i.




                           Figure 1. The gravity center of stations’ importance distribution.

     The gravity
     The            centerreflects
          gravitycenter              themphasis
                           reflectsthe   emphasis    railrail
                                                  of of   transit development
                                                              transit  development  on urban
                                                                                       on urbanspatial location.
                                                                                                   spatial       The
                                                                                                            location.
location of the gravity  center will  change  with the  development      of rail transit, and  the focus
The location of the gravity center will change with the development of rail transit, and the focus area   area of the
center          the importance
       reflectsreflects
of the center                             of thearea
                                  of the urban
                        the importance           urban     certain
                                                      to aarea        certainThe
                                                                to aextent.        index
                                                                              extent.  Thewill  be used
                                                                                            index   willtobecalculate
                                                                                                             used to
the matching   degree   between   the  network  and   the  urban  trips.
calculate the matching degree between the network and the urban trips.

2.1.3.          Dimension
        Fractal Dimension
2.1.3. Fractal
       Fractal theory
      Fractal  theory originated
                        originated in in the late 1960s
                                         the late         and was
                                                  1960s and         founded by
                                                               was founded     by Mandelbrot,
                                                                                  Mandelbrot, B    [21]. The
                                                                                                 B [21]. The theory
                                                                                                              theory
was originally used to describe highly irregular graphics. Fractal dimension is the most important
was   originally  used   to describe    highly  irregular   graphics.  Fractal  dimension   is the most   important
parameter of
parameter       fractal theory.
             of fractal           It is
                         theory. It  is used
                                        used to
                                              to describe      dimension of
                                                           the dimension
                                                 describe the                  complex irregular
                                                                            of complex             graphics, which
                                                                                        irregular graphics,    which
is the
is      measure of
   the measure    of spatial
                     spatial scale
                              scale and
                                      and overall
                                           overall complexity
                                                    complexity of    the graphics.
                                                                  of the            In 1991,
                                                                         graphics. In         L. Benguigui
                                                                                       1991, L.  Benguigui and     M.
                                                                                                              and M.
Daoud    [22] inspected    the railway    system   in the suburb   of Paris and  found  that  the
Daoud [22] inspected the railway system in the suburb of Paris and found that the railway network railway   network
showed aa branched
showed                   fractal structure.
            branched fractal                  After that,
                                 structure. After    that, the fractal theory
                                                           the fractal         was gradually
                                                                       theory was  gradually applied        the field
                                                                                                         in the
                                                                                                applied in      field
of transportation.
of  transportation.
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6128                                                                                          5 of 23



     In   fact, there
      Sustainability        are
                     2019, 11,    fractal
                               x FOR       features in a certain space–time range between the city5 of
                                     PEER REVIEW                                                                  and
                                                                                                                    23 the
transportation network systems, and their fractal geometry properties reflect the self-similar
             In fact, there are fractal features in a certain space–time range between the city and the
characteristics of the systems. In this paper, the city is regarded as a circular area, and the radius is
      transportation network systems, and their fractal geometry properties reflect the self-similar
centered around the urban center. Figure 2 shows the urban rail transit lines in the city with radius r,
      characteristics of the systems. In this paper, the city is regarded as a circular area, and the radius is
        the point
wherecentered          O represents
                   around                the urban
                             the urban center.        center.
                                                 Figure       Thethe
                                                        2 shows    sum  of the
                                                                     urban       transit linesimportance
                                                                            rail structural                 degrees
                                                                                               in the city with radiusof all
            (r) within
       r , Iwhere
stations                    the radius
                     the point           r is calculated
                                  O represents  the urban by  Equation
                                                          center.       (7):of the structural importance degrees of
                                                                  The sum
       all stations I ( r ) within the radius r is calculated by Equation (7):
                                                                      nr
                                                                      X
                                                        I (r) =n           Ii (r)                                         (7)
                                                       I (r )  i=I i1(r )
                                                                  r

                                                                                                                 (7)
                                                                i 1

        Ii (r) is
wherewhere      I i (rthe
                       ) isstructural
                            the structural importancedegree
                                                      degree of
                                        importance              station ii within
                                                             of station    withinthe   radiusr r,
                                                                                  theradius    , nnr r is thenumber
                                                                                                       isthe  number of
stations   within within
      of stations       the radius   r.
                               the radius   r.




                                 Figure2.
                                Figure      Urbanrail
                                        2. Urban  railtransit
                                                       transit lines
                                                               linesininthe
                                                                         thecity
                                                                              citywith
                                                                                   withradius r .r.
                                                                                         radius

          According
      According     to the
                to the     fractal
                       fractal          I (r)I (and
                                   theory,
                                theory,         r ) and  r satisfy
                                                     r satisfy     the following
                                                               the following     relationship:
                                                                              relationship:
                                                         I (r )  r DSD                                          (8)
                                                           I (r) ∝ r S                                                    (8)
       where DS is the fractal dimension of the stations’ importance distribution.
where DS The     cityfractal
            is the            dimension
                       is divided          of the
                                  into several     stations’
                                                circles by theimportance    distribution.
                                                               radii with different  lengths, and the stations with
     The   city importance
      different  is divided are     several in
                               intoscattered  circles  by the
                                                the circles. Soradii        different lengths,
                                                                      with dimensions
                                                                the fractal                     and the
                                                                                        corresponding   to stations
                                                                                                           different with
            can be obtained.
      radiiimportance
different                   are scattered in the circles. So the fractal dimensions corresponding to different
radii can be     fractal dimensions corresponding to different radii can reflect the change of rail transit
            Theobtained.
      supply   capacity
     The fractal dimensions        urban center to atoperipheral
                           from an corresponding                   area. In
                                                        different radii  canfact, the urban
                                                                              reflect       development
                                                                                      the change           is biased
                                                                                                  of rail transit supply
      towards the central area, so the supply capacity of the central area is usually larger than that of the
capacity from an urban center to a peripheral area. In fact, the urban development is biased towards
      peripheral area. The index will be used to calculate the matching degree between the network and
the central area, so the supply capacity of the central area is usually larger than that of the peripheral
      the urban land use.
area. The index will be used to calculate the matching degree between the network and the urban
land use.
      2.2. Matching with Urban Characteristics

2.2. Matching  with
     2.2.1. Urban   Urban
                  Road    Characteristics
                       Network
          Usually, urban rail transit lines are laid along the roads, and only in special cases can be
2.2.1. Urban Road Network
       constructed through land blocks. Therefore, it is necessary to limit the roads, so as to determine the
     range andurban
     Usually,        rail transit
                direction         lines are laid
                          of the searchable       along
                                             sections        roads, andthe
                                                         the generating
                                                       when               only in special
                                                                            network.      cases
                                                                                      In this   cannot
                                                                                                    beonly
                                                                                              way,       constructed
                                                                                                             the
     planner’s
through        subjective
         land blocks.       and groundless
                         Therefore,           decision can
                                      it is necessary        be avoided
                                                        to limit          withso
                                                                  the roads,    mathematical   model,
                                                                                  as to determine   the but also and
                                                                                                          range
     reasonable
direction of the route boundaries
                 searchable              be grasped.
                                    can when
                               sections                We refer
                                                 generating   thetonetwork.
                                                                    the topological
                                                                             In thisnetwork
                                                                                      way, notused     limit
                                                                                                   to the
                                                                                                only         the
                                                                                                           planner’s
     search range  and  the search direction  as the ‘basic network’.
subjective and groundless decision can be avoided with mathematical model, but also reasonable route
boundaries can be grasped. We refer to the topological network used to limit the search range and the
search direction as the ‘basic network’.
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6128                                                                           6 of 23
Sustainability 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                              6 of 23

      The locations of large traffic volume and passenger flow corridors are the main factors affecting
      The locations of large traffic volume and passenger flow corridors are the main factors affecting
the line alignments and network structure. Among the factors, the locations with large traffic volume
the line alignments and network structure. Among the factors, the locations with large traffic volume
are the main source of production and attraction of passenger flow, including transportation hubs and
are the main source of production and attraction of passenger flow, including transportation hubs
centers of a district. The transportation hubs include a bus transfer hub, bus terminal, railway station
and centers of a district. The transportation hubs include a bus transfer hub, bus terminal, railway
and airport, etc. The centers of a district include commercial and cultural sites, large enterprises, large
station and airport, etc. The centers of a district include commercial and cultural sites, large
residential areas and tourist attractions, etc. So the basic network should be established by connecting
enterprises, large residential areas and tourist attractions, etc. So the basic network should be
the main locations of large traffic volume and covering the main passenger flow corridors. Before
established by connecting the main locations of large traffic volume and covering the main passenger
establishing the basic network, the main passenger corridors are determined by a ‘cobweb assignment’
flow corridors. Before establishing the basic network, the main passenger corridors are determined
method, and the steps are as follows:
by a ‘cobweb assignment’ method, and the steps are as follows:
      Step 1: Generate OD (origin-destination) desire lines between traffic zones according to the
      Step 1: Generate OD (origin-destination) desire lines between traffic zones according to the
predicted passenger demand.
predicted passenger demand.
      Step 2: Eliminate the inter-zone desire lines while the desire lines between adjacent zones are
      Step 2: Eliminate the inter-zone desire lines while the desire lines between adjacent zones are
retained. The network formed by the retained desire lines is called ‘virtual cobweb’.
retained. The network formed by the retained desire lines is called ‘virtual cobweb’.
      Step 3: Passenger assignment is carried out on the ‘virtual cobweb’ with all-or-nothing method.
      Step 3: Passenger assignment is carried out on the ‘virtual cobweb’ with all-or-nothing method.
      Step 4: Judging the main passenger flow corridors according to the scale of passenger
      Step 4: Judging the main passenger flow corridors according to the scale of passenger flow
flow accumulation.
accumulation.
      Usually, most of the research on actual transit network designs are based on the premise that the
      Usually, most of the research on actual transit network designs are based on the premise that
basic network is known because of lacking effective determination method. Therefore, the determining
the basic network is known because of lacking effective determination method. Therefore, the
process of the basic network proposed in this paper is as follows:
determining process of the basic network proposed in this paper is as follows:
      Step 1: Selection of trunk roads that meet the conditions for rail transit construction.
      Step 1: Selection of trunk roads that meet the conditions for rail transit construction.
      According to the urban traffic road network in the area requiring rail transit construction, the
      According to the urban traffic road network in the area requiring rail transit construction, the
trunk roads along the passenger corridors and connecting the locations with large traffic volume
trunk roads along the passenger corridors and connecting the locations with large traffic volume are
are selected.
selected.
      Step 2: Selection of other roads that can connect the locations of large traffic volume.
      Step 2: Selection of other roads that can connect the locations of large traffic volume.
      If the selected trunk roads cannot connect all the necessary locations of large traffic volume, other
      If the selected trunk roads cannot connect all the necessary locations of large traffic volume,
roads around the locations that meet the construction conditions and land-use requirements should
other roads around the locations that meet the construction conditions and land-use requirements
be selected.
should be selected.
      Step
      Step 3:   The main
             3: The       locationsofoflarge
                    main locations             trafficvolume
                                        largetraffic   volume     connected
                                                             areare         along
                                                                    connected     thethe
                                                                               along  selected roads,
                                                                                         selected     andand
                                                                                                  roads,  the
topology network formed is the basic network.
the topology network formed is the basic network.
      The locations with close distance and large traffic volume are merged. In this way, not only the
      The locations with close distance and large traffic volume are merged. In this way, not only the
complexity of solving the model, but also the detour distance of the generated transit lines can be
complexity of solving the model, but also the detour distance of the generated transit lines can be
reduced. Figure 3 shows the urban rail transit lines laid along the main routes in the basic network.
reduced. Figure 3 shows the urban rail transit lines laid along the main routes in the basic network.




                  Figure 3. Urban rail transit lines laid along the main routes in the basic network.

2.2.2. Trip Intensity
Sustainability 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                          7 of 23


      There is a certain difference for trip volumes in different traffic zones, and the volume in each
zone includes the production and attraction of the trips. So, the trip intensity in each zone can be
               by the
calculated 2019,
Sustainability      11,amount
                       6128   of the production and attraction of the zone, as shown in Equation (9):7 of 23
                                                     Si  Pi  Ai                                                     (9)

         S i Intensity
2.2.2. Trip
where        is the trip intensity in traffic zone i , Pi and Ai are the production and attraction of trip
volume   in traffic
     There                 i , respectively.
                    zone difference
             is a certain              for trip volumes in different traffic zones, and the volume in each
      includesthe
zoneUsually,         production
                 thetrip  intensityand   attraction
                                      of each  zone of   betrips.
                                                    canthe                   be intensity
                                                                  So, thetotrip
                                                            considered                    in each
                                                                                 concentrated     zone
                                                                                               in the   can be
                                                                                                      centroid
calculated
position  ofby
             thethe     So, ifof
                    amount
                 zone.            the
                                the   production
                                    centroid      and attraction
                                             positions            of the
                                                       are assigned      zone, as showntrip-intensity
                                                                                          in Equation (9):
                                                                      to corresponding                 values,
the distribution of the trip volume can be expressed in the form of scatter in the city. Similarly, if the
trip intensity of each zone is regarded as the          Pi + Ai of the zone, the equilibrium point of the
                                                  Si =‘gravity’                                             (9)
‘gravity’ is the gravity center of trip intensity, as shown in Figure 4. In Figure 4, each area represents
where   Si iszone,
              the tripo intensity  in traffic zone i, Pi and Ai are the production and attraction of trip volume
the traffic            1 ~o 9 are the centroid positions of traffic zones, G1 ~ G9 are the ‘gravity’ values,
in traffic zone i, respectively.
and O P is the gravity center of trip intensity. The coordinates of the gravity center can be calculated
      Usually, the trip intensity of each zone can be considered to be concentrated in the centroid
           of the(10)–(11):
by Equations
position          zone. So, if the centroid positions are assigned to corresponding trip-intensity values,
the distribution of the trip volume can be expressed        m             in the form of scatter in the city. Similarly, if
the trip intensity of each zone is regarded as the               x  S
                                                                  ‘gravity’ of the zone, the equilibrium point of the
                                                                   i   i

‘gravity’ is the gravity center of trip intensity,  x 2 asi shown
                                                               1
                                                               m                                                     (10)
                                                                            in Figure 4. In Figure 4, each area represents
the traffic zone, o1 ∼ o9 are the centroid positions         of
                                                              i 1
                                                                   S
                                                                   traffic
                                                                     i       zones, G1 ∼ G9 are the ‘gravity’ values, and
OP is the gravity center of trip intensity. The coordinates of the gravity center can be calculated by
                                                             m
Equations (10)–(11):
                                                                  yS
                                                                  mi i
                                                    y 2  m xi Si
                                                           i 1
                                                                  P
                                                                                                                     (11)
                                                      x2 = mi
                                                                 i=1
                                                                   S                                                  (10)
                                                              i 1 P
                                                                         Si
                                                             i=1
where ( x2 , y 2 ) is the coordinate pair of the gravity center of urban trip intensity, m is the number
                                                         m
                                                         P
of traffic zones divided in the city, ( xi , yi ) is the coordinate
                                                           yi S     pair of centroid position of traffic zone
                                                            i=1
i.                                                   y2 = m                                                  (11)
                                                            P
      The gravity center of urban trip intensity reflects      Si the bias in the distribution of urban trip
                                                           i=1
volume. If the trip intensity in an area increases, the gravity center will develop toward the area. On
where   (x2 , y2 )ifisthe
the contrary,              coordinate
                       thetrip intensitypair of the gravity
                                         decreases,         center of urban
                                                     the development        trip intensity,
                                                                       direction            m is the
                                                                                  of the gravity     number
                                                                                                  center       of
                                                                                                         will be
traffic zones divided in the city, (xi , yi ) is the coordinate pair of centroid position of traffic zone i.
reversed.




                                           The gravity
                                 Figure 4. The         center of
                                               gravity center    urban trip
                                                              of urban trip intensity.

      The gravity
      Urban    rail transit
                     center of  a maintrip
                             is urban       intensity reflects
                                         transportation   mode thefor
                                                                   bias     the distribution
                                                                                      in the of
                                                                      theinresidents            urban
                                                                                             city. Thetrip
                                                                                                        railvolume.
                                                                                                             transit
            intensitynot
If the trip should
network                in an
                          onlyarea increases,
                                 satisfy      the gravity
                                         the capacity      center will
                                                        demand         develop toward
                                                                   of passenger          the area.
                                                                                   transport, but On
                                                                                                   alsothe contrary,
                                                                                                         match  the
if the trip intensity decreases, the development direction of the gravity center will be reversed.
      Urban rail transit is a main transportation mode for the residents in the city. The rail transit
network should not only satisfy the capacity demand of passenger transport, but also match the
center O P of urban trip intensity and the gravity center O S of stations’ importance distribution is
used to characterize the matching degree between the network and urban trips, as shown in Figure
5. The deviation value is expressed as the ratio of Euclidean distance between O P and O S to urban
radius, as shown in Equation (12).
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6128                                                                                          8 of 23

                                                        ( x1  x 2 )  ( y1  y 2 )
                                                                  2             2

                                       d (OP , OS )                                                                     (12)
distribution of trip volume in the city. So the importance             r ' distribution of rail transit stations should
where the
match     d different            valueinoftraffic
                        trip volume
               is the deviation            gravityzones.    In this
                                                      centers    betweenpaper,the      deviation
                                                                                  thestations’    value between
                                                                                               importance         the gravity
                                                                                                            distribution  and
center
the trip OPintensity,    r ' intensity
              of urban trip            and the
                              is the radius                    from Othe
                                                  gravity center
                                               calculated                        stations’
                                                                            S oftotal   areaimportance
                                                                                               A(r ') of distribution   used
                                                                                                         the city, satisfying
to characterize     the matching degree between the network and urban trips, as shown in Figure 5. The
 A(r ')   r '2 .
deviation value is expressed as the ratio of Euclidean distance between OP and OS to urban radius, as
       Furthermore, the matching degree mC between urban rail transit network and urban trips can
shown in Equation (12).
be calculated by Equation (13). The value of qmC is between                        0 and 1, and the closer the index value
                                                           (x1 − x2 )2 + ( y1 − y2 )2
is to 1, the higher the matching ddegree(OP , OSbetween
                                                  )=         the network and urban trips.                                 (12)
                                                                           r0
                                                                 1                                                      (131
                                                    C 
where d is the deviation value of gravity m       centers   between the stations’ importance distribution and              the
                                                        1   d (O  P , O
trip intensity, r0 is the radius calculated from the total area A(r0) of the city, satisfying A(r0) = πr0 . )
                                                                          S )                                              2




                                           5. Deviation of the two gravity centers.
                                    Figure 5.
                                    Figure

2.2.3.Furthermore,     the matching degree mC between urban rail transit network and urban trips can be
       Land-Use Intensity
calculated by Equation (13). The value of mC is between 0 and 1, and the closer the index value is to 1,
      There is a feedback relationship between urban rail transit and land use. Land-use intensity is
the higher the matching degree between the network and urban trips.
the root cause of passenger volume for urban rail transit while the rail transit could have a positive
guiding role in the development of surrounding land1 use. Therefore, in the stage of network design,
it is necessary to ensure the matchingmbetween   C =                                                    (13)
                                                             (OPurban
                                                      1 + dthe  , OS ) rail transit network and the land-use
intensity [23].
       Land-Useintensity
2.2.3.Land-use       Intensitydirectly affects the accumulation of urban population, so it can be calculated
by the population size within the area. Similarly, according to fractal theory, the relationship between
      There is a feedback relationship between urban rail transit and land use. Land-use intensity is the
the radius r of the urban area and the land-use intensity satisfies Equation (14):
root cause of passenger volume for urban rail transit while the rail transit could have a positive guiding
role in the development of surrounding land use. DTherefore, in the stage of network design,(142        it is
                                                   P(r )  r     P

necessary to ensure the matching between the urban rail transit network and the land-use intensity [23].   )
      Land-use intensity directly affects the accumulation of urban population, so it can be calculated
where P() is the land-use intensity calculated by the sum of resident and employed population,
by the population size within the area. Similarly, according to fractal theory, the relationship between
 D P radius
the             of thedimension
      is the rfractal  urban areaof       land-use
                                     thethe
                                   and              intensity.
                                             land-use  intensity satisfies Equation (14):

                                                        P(r) ∝ rDP                                                       (14)

where P(·) is the land-use intensity calculated by the sum of resident and employed population, DP is
the fractal dimension of the land-use intensity.
Sustainability 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                            9 of 23


      Deriving
Sustainability           on both sides of Equation Error! Reference source not found., we can obtain
                     r 6128
               2019, 11,                                                                       9 of 23
Equation (15):
                                                      dP(r )           DP 1
       Deriving r on both sides of Equation (14), we           Dcanpr
                                                                         obtain Equation (15):                                          (15)
                                                        dr
                                                        dP(r)
        The area of the circle with radius r is A(∝             r) D prD    , satisfying dA(r ) dr  2 r , so the land-use
                                                                         r 2P −1                                                          (15)
                                                          dr
intensity per unit area  (r ) can be obtained from Equation (16):
       The area of the circle with radius r is A(r) = πr2 , satisfying dA(r)/dr = 2πr, so the land-use
                                                           dP(r )
intensity per unit area ρ(r) can be obtained      (r )  from Equation
                                                                   Dp r DP  2(16):                                                    (16)
                                                           dA(r )
                                                             dP(r)
        As can be seen from Equation              ρ(r)Error!
                                                         =            ∝ Dp rDP −2source not found., when D p (16)
                                                                  Reference                                                                2 ,
                                                             dA(r)
  (r )  Dp (1 r ) DP  2 , and as the statistical area expands with the increased radius r ,  (r ) gradually
                                                                                               |DP −2|
       As can
decreases       be seen
              from                 Equation
                             fromcenter
                      the city           to the(16), when Dof
                                                 periphery      p <      ρ(r) ∝
                                                                     2, city.
                                                                   the             Dp (1/r
                                                                                 When      D p) =2 ,  , and
                                                                                                         (r ) as     the statistical
                                                                                                                remains        unchanged.area
expands with the increased radius r, ρ(r) gradually decreases from the city center to the periphery of
When D p  2 ,  (r ) gradually increases from the city center to the periphery of the city. Therefore,
the city. When       Dp = 2, ρ(r) remains unchanged. When Dp > 2, ρ(r) gradually increases from the city
the   fractal  dimension
center to the periphery of         r ) reflects
                                 P(the           the changing
                                        city. Therefore,             trend
                                                            the fractal         of urbanPland-use
                                                                            dimension        (r) reflectsintensity
                                                                                                              the changing  from trend
                                                                                                                                     the city
                                                                                                                                            of
         to the periphery
center land-use
urban                              the city.
                     intensityoffrom     the city center to the periphery of the city.
       However, the city does          not develop
                                 does not               evenlyininall
                                             developevenly             alldirections.
                                                                            directions.Therefore,
                                                                                            Therefore,        this
                                                                                                           inin    thispaper,
                                                                                                                           paper,      city
                                                                                                                                  thethe    is
                                                                                                                                          city
divided     into   several     fan-shaped     areas  in  the   radial     direction.
is divided into several fan-shaped areas in the radial direction. The fractal dimension The     fractal     dimension          of  land-use
intensity in each fan-shaped area            should be
                                       area should         calculated.IfIfthe
                                                       be calculated.           thecity
                                                                                    cityisisdivided
                                                                                             dividedinto  into m         areas (as seen in
                                                                                                                  m0' areas
Figure 6,    the city
          6, the             dividedinto
                 city isisdivided           fourfan-shaped
                                      intofour   fan-shapedareas  areasusing
                                                                           usingfourfour   quadrants.),       the     fractal
                                                                                        quadrants.), the fractal dimension       dimension  of
of  land-use    intensity     in different   areas can   be  expressed
land-use intensity in different areas can be expressed by the vector [D1 , D  by  the vector      [ D1 2 , 2D3 ,3. . . , Dm0
                                                                                                       , D  , D   ,     , D   ] , where the
                                                                                                                           m ' , where

subscript number of the vector element represents the area number.                      number. So, the fractal dimension vector
D         stations’importance
 DSS ofofstations’  importancedistribution
                                      distributionand       andthethefractal
                                                                       fractal  dimension
                                                                                   dimension       vector
                                                                                                      vector DP DofP land-use intensity
                                                                                                                      of land-use        can
                                                                                                                                   intensity
be  expressed    as [ D   , D
                        S1 [ D   , D
                              S2S1 , DS3 , . . . , D      ] and   [ D   , D     , D    , . . . , D     ] , respectively,
                                                       , DSm ' ] andP1[ DP1 , DP 2 , DP3 , , DPm ' ] , respectively, whereSi DSithe
                                                                                                                           where  D   is
can be expressed as                   S 2 , DS 3 ,                                                                                         is
                                                      Sm0                    P2     P3             Pm0
fractal   dimension   of stations’     importance           distribution     in   area   i,  D  Pi is the
the fractal dimension of stations’ importance distribution in area i , D Pi is the fractal dimension of     fractal  dimension  of land-use
intensity in area i, i = 1, 2, . . . m0. The deviation value between DS and DP is used to describe the
land-use intensity in area i , i  1, 2, m ' . The deviation value between D and DP is used to
matching between the network and urban land use, as shown in Equation (17):S
describe the matching between the network and urban land use, as shown in Equation (17):
                                                                      s
                                                                      m' P
                                                                          m0
                                                                                                 2
                                                                         ( D (D
                                                                         i=1 Si
                                                                                 SiD−
                                                                                     Pi )
                                                                                         D2 Pi )
                                                                                                                                       (17)
                                                      DSS , DPP) = i 1
                                                   d((D                                                                                  (17)
                                                                             m 'm0
where dd(D( DSS, ,DDPP)) isisthe   deviation value
                               thedeviation   value of
                                                     of fractal
                                                         fractal dimensions  between the
                                                                  dimensions between     stations’ importance
                                                                                     the stations’
distribution   and     the   land-use intensity.
distribution and the land-use intensity.




                     Figure 6. The city is divided into four fan-shaped areas using four quadrants.
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6128                                                                                                  10 of 23



    Therefore, the matching degree mF between the network and land use can be expressed by
Equation (18). The value of mF is between 0 and 1, and the closer the index value is to 1, the higher the
matching degree between the network and the land use.

                                                                         1
                                                         mF =                                                                     (18)
                                                                 1 + d ( DS , DP )

3. Model Formulation

3.1. Notations
                                                                                         
    The station and section of urban rail transit are abstracted as node i in N and edge i, j in E,
respectively. The topological network for urban rail transit is established, which is expressed as
G = G(N, E). The notations in the model are shown in Tables 1–3.
                                                       Table 1. Sets in the model.

            Sets                                                       Meaning
             L                The set of lines of the candidate network, satisfying l ∈ L.
                                                                                   
             E                The set of sections of the basic network, satisfying i, j ∈ E.
             N                The set of stations of the basic network, satisfying i, j ∈ N.
            N (i)             The set of adjacent points of station i.
             W                The set of OD pairs between the locations of large traffic volume, satisfying w ∈ W.
            Np                The set of effective paths between OD pairs, satisfying p ∈ Np .


                                               Table 2. Known quantities in the model.

              Notations                                                  Meaning
                                                            
                       di j           The length of section i, j .
                       gw             The passenger demand between OD pair w.
                l
               Nnodesmin              The minimum number of stations of line l in the candidate network.
                l
               Nnodesmax              The maximum number of stations of line l in the candidate network.
                  dlmin               The minimum length of line l in the candidate network.
                  dlmax               The maximum length of line l in the candidate network.
                Nlmin                 The minimum number of lines in the candidate network.
                Nl max                The maximum number of lines in the candidate network.
                                                               
                   Ci j               The capacity of section i, j .
                    xi                The abscissa of station i.
                    yi                The ordinate of station i.
                    a                 The station repeatability, satisfying a > 0 and a is an integer.
                    b                 The section repeatability, satisfying b > 0 and b is an integer.
                    c                 The minimum angle between adjacent sections in a line.
                mCmin                 The minimum matching degree between the network and urban trips.
                mFmin                 The minimum matching degree between the network and land-use intensity.


                                                    Table 3. Variables in the model.

           Variables                                                    Meaning
                                                                          
               ei j             If the candidate network has the section i, j , eij = 1, 0 otherwise.
               elij             If the line l in the candidate network has the section i, j , elij = 1, 0 otherwise.
                                                                                        

               vi               If the candidate network has the station i, vi = 1, 0 otherwise.
               vli              If the line l in the candidate network has the station i, vli = 1, 0 otherwise.
                wpl                                                                                     wpl
              fij               If the OD pair w passes the section i, j of line l along the path p, fi j = 1, 0 otherwise.
                       0                                                                                0
              f wpll            If the OD pair w transfers from line l to line l0 along the path p, f wpll = 1, 0 otherwise.
                                                                                     
                qij             The cross-sectional passenger volume of section i, j .
               Pwp              The selection probability of path p between OD pair w.
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6128                                                                            11 of 23



3.2. Objective Functions
      In this paper, we focus on how to consider the characteristics of urban road network, trips and land
use in the quantitative network design. So other factors involved in the model have to be simplified.
The model is formulated based on the assumption that passenger demand for the urban rail transit is
already known.
      In this paper, the logit-based multi-path passenger flow assignment method is adopted. The
utility function for path selection is expressed by passenger’s travel time which is the main influencing
factor, as shown in Equation (19):
                                       p     p        p        p
                                     Tw = Tr + Td + Tt , w ∈ W, p ∈ Np                                      (19)

           p                                                                   p                        p
where Tw is the travel time for OD pair w along the path p, Tr is the travel time in sections, Td is the
                                         p
dwell time at intermediate stations, Tt is the transfer time.
    During the trip, too many transfers will seriously affect the convenience for passengers, and thus
reduce the attraction of the urban rail transit. In order to describe the influence of transfers, the transfer
penalty is used for transfer time calculation, as shown in Equation (20):

                                                          Ttk (λk + 1)γ
                                                      X
                                              p            p
                                            Tt =                                                            (20)
                                                      k

           p
where Ttk is the transfer time in the kth transfer station along the path p, λ is the passenger’s transfer
sensitivity, γ is the adjustment coefficient which is usually larger than 1. The larger the γ, the greater
the difference for sensitivity levels between different transfer times in the path.
     The effective paths, which are defined by Equation (21), are searched for between each OD pair in
the network. So the path selection probability Pwp is calculated by Equation (22):
                                                  p                  p
                                              Tw ≤ (1 + H )Twmin                                            (21)
                                                                               p
where H is the detour coefficient and is set to 1.5 in this paper, Twmin is the travel time in the shortest path.
                                                          p
                                          exp(−θTw )
                                   Pwp = P          p , w ∈ W, p ∈ Np                                       (22)
                                            exp(−θTw )
                                           p∈Np


where θ is the calibration parameter.
     As a kind of public transport, urban rail transit should not only achieve the purpose of profitability
for the managers, but also take into account the service function to meet passengers’ demand. In this
paper, the objective functions are formulated from the perspective of both managers and passengers to
improve the transport efficiency of the network and the convenience for passengers.

Objective 1: Maximize the transport efficiency of the network
     From the managers’ point of view, the network should transport as much passengers as possible
to improve the operating income. Passenger turnover quantity refers to the product of the passenger
volume and the distance transported in a certain period of time, and the unit is p·km. The larger the
passenger turnover quantity, the higher the transport capacity of the network. Therefore, the passenger
turnover quantity per unit length of the network is used to characterize the transport efficiency, which
is expressed by Equation (23):                      P
                                                        qij dij eij
                                                          {i,j}∈E
                                           maxZ1 =             P                                            (23)
                                                                     dij eij
                                                           {i,j}∈E
      Sustainability 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                            12 of 23


      passenger turnover quantity, the higher the transport capacity of the network. Therefore, the
      passenger turnover quantity per unit length of the network is used to characterize the transport
      efficiency, which is expressed by Equation (23):
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6128                                                                                                     12 of 23
                                                qde             {i , j }E
                                                                                ij    ij ij

                                      max Z                                                                                 (23)
                                                de
                                                            1
                                                                                     ij ij
Objective 2: Maximize the travel convenience for passengers        {i , j }E


           Objective
     In order         2: Maximize
                to explore         the travel convenience
                            the relationship   between the    passengers
                                                          fortransfer times and the travel time in paths, the
           In orderbetween
effective paths     to explore     OD pair inbetween
                               the relationship
                             each                       the transfer
                                                 the metro  networktimes   and the(as
                                                                       of Beijing   travel        inpaths,
                                                                                            time in
                                                                                         shown       Figurethe7) are
      effective paths between   each  OD  pair in the metro network  of Beijing (as  shown
calculated, and the results are shown in Figure 8. As can be seen, a path with more transfer  in Figure 7) aretimes
      calculated, and the results are shown in Figure 8. As can be seen, a path with more transfer times
tends to have more average travel time, and the greater the transfer sensitivity, the more obvious the
      tends to have more average travel time, and the greater the transfer sensitivity, the more obvious the
phenomenon. Therefore, the average travel time of all passengers can be reduced while the average
      phenomenon. Therefore, the average travel time of all passengers can be reduced while the average
transfer times in paths are reduced.
      transfer times in paths are reduced.




                            Figure
                         Figure    7. The
                                7. The    metrotopological
                                        metro               network in
                                                topological network     Beijing2017
                                                                     inBeijing      (288
                                                                                 2017    stations).
                                                                                      (288  stations).




      Sustainability 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                            13 of 23
                                   (a)                                                                 (b)




                                    (c)                                                                (d)

      FigureFigure  8. relationship
               8. The   The relationship
                                     between between              timestimes
                                                        the transfer
                                                  the transfer            and the      the travel
                                                                                 andtravel  time intime     (a) λ =(a)0 (insensitive
                                                                                                        in paths:
                                                                                                     paths:               0
      to transfer); (b) λ
            (insensitive to=           (b)(c) λ 1
                               1, γ = 2;
                            transfer);               γ
                                                  =, 2,  2=; 2;             γ 2=; (d)
                                                                    λ 2=, 3,
                                                              (c)(d)                 2.   3 ,   2 .

           In order to improve the travel convenience for passengers, it is necessary to improve the
      directness of traveling for passengers. Reducing the transfer times for passengers is a very effective
      method to achieve this. Therefore, the average number of transfer passengers between lines is used
      as the second objective, which is expressed by Equation (24):

                                                           gP f                     w wp
                                                                                              wpll '
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6128                                                                       13 of 23



      In order to improve the travel convenience for passengers, it is necessary to improve the directness
of traveling for passengers. Reducing the transfer times for passengers is a very effective method to
achieve this. Therefore, the average number of transfer passengers between lines is used as the second
objective, which is expressed by Equation (24):
                                                                                            0
                                                                            gw Pwp f wpll
                                                      P        P       P
                                                     w∈W l,l0∈L,l,l0 p∈Np
                                       minZ2 =                                                         (24)
                                                                |L|(|L| − 1)/2

     Both the two objectives have the same unit, so the problem can be easily converted into a single
objective problem with weighted sum approach for the convenience of solving. The transformed
objective function is shown in Equation (25):

                                                 maxZ =β1 Z1 − β2 Z2                                   (25)

where β1 + β2 = 1, satisfying 0 ≤ β1 ≤ 1, 0 ≤ β2 ≤ 1.

3.3. Constraints
      Constraint 1: Network topological relationship.

                                             elij ≤ vli , l ∈ L, i ∈ N, i, j ∈ E
                                                                       
                                                                                                       (26)

                                             elij ≤ vlj , l ∈ L, j ∈ N, i, j ∈ E
                                                                       
                                                                                                       (27)

                                                elij = elji , l ∈ L, i, j ∈ E
                                                                     
                                                                                                       (28)
                                                     X
                                              eij ≤       elij , l ∈ L, {i, j} ∈ E                     (29)
                                                        l∈L

                                               elij ≤ eij , l ∈ L, i, j ∈ E
                                                                  
                                                                                                       (30)
                                               X
                                                    elij ≤ 2, l ∈ L, {i, j} ∈ E                        (31)
                                              j∈N (i)

                                              1 X l        X
                                                  eij +1 =   vli , l ∈ L                               (32)
                                              2
                                                {i,j}∈E              i∈N
                                               X
                                                     vli ≤ a, i ∈ N, {i, j} ∈ E                        (33)
                                               l∈L
                                                   X
                                                           elij ≤ b, {i, j} ∈ E                        (34)
                                                     l∈L

      Equations (26) and (27) indicate that if the station i or station j is not on the line l, the section

 i, j will not on the line l. Equation (28) indicates that the network is regarded as undirected graph.
                                                                          
Equations (29) and (30) indicate that if the network has the section i, j ∈ E, multiple lines in the
                                                    
network are allowed to pass through the section i, j . Equations (31) and (32) indicate that the line l
has neither branches nor loops. Equation (33) indicates that there are up to a lines have the station i in
                                                                                                 
the network. Similarly, Equation (34) indicates that there are up to b lines have the section i, j .
      Constraint 2: Passenger flow balance.

                                                                     −1, k ∈ Ow
                                                                   
                          X X              X X                     
                                                                   
                                           wpl                wpl  
                                         fik −               fk j = 1, k ∈ Dw , w ∈ W, p ∈ Np         (35)
                                                                   
                                                                   
                                                                   
                           l∈L i:{i,k}∈E       l∈L j:{k,j}∈E        0, else
                                    fijwpl  f jiwpl  eijl , l  L, {i, j}  E, w W , p  N p                (36)

     Equation (35) indicates that for OD pair w , if station k is the departure station O w , there is only
the inflow at the station; if station k is the intermediate station, the inflow is equal to the outflow at
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6128                                                                                 14 of 23
the station; if station k is the terminal station D w , there is only outflow at the station. Equation (36)
indicates that there is no backflow in the line l .
                                 wpl     wpl
                                             ≤ elij , l ∈
                                                            
     Constraint 3: Matching fdegrees
                                 ij
                                     + f jibetween        L, i, j ∈and
                                                        network          ∈ W, characteristics.
                                                                    E, wurban p ∈ Np                   (36)

     Equation (35) indicates that for OD pair              C 1
                                               mC minw,ifmstation k is the departure station Ow , there is (37)
                                                                                                            only
the inflow at the station; if station k is the intermediate station, the inflow is equal to the outflow at
                                               mF min w mF  1                                             (38)
the station; if station k is the terminal station     D , there is only outflow at the station. Equation (36)
indicates that there
     Equations    (37) is no(38)
                        and  backflow  in the
                                 indicate       the l.matching degrees mC and mF should meet the upper
                                          thatline
     Constraint    3: Matching
and lower limits, respectively.  degrees  between     network and urban characteristics.
      Constraint 4: Line alignments.
                                         mCmin ≤ mC ≤ 1                                         (37)
      In Figure 9, i , j and k represent three adjacent stations in line l .  is the angle between
the vectors ji and jk . In order to ensuremthe                     line alignment goes smoothly, the angle  between
                                                                Fmin ≤ mF ≤ 1                                    (38)
the adjacent sections should not be too small, as seen in Equation (39).
     Equations (37) and (38) indicate that the matching degrees mC and mF should meet the upper and
lower limits, respectively.                                    c                                            (39)
     Constraint 4: Line alignments.
     The cosine of the angle between the vectors ji and jk can be easily calculated by Equation                    →
     In Figure 9, i, j and k represent three adjacent stations in line l. α is the angle between the vectors ji
     So Equation (39) can be expressed by Equation (41).
(40).→
and jk. In order to ensure the line alignment goes smoothly, the angle α between the adjacent sections
                                                 ( xi  x j )( xk  x j )  ( yi  y j )( yk  y j )
should not be too small,cos       asseen
                                        in Equation (39).                                                      (40)
                                            ( xi  x j )2  ( yi  y j )2 ( xk  x j )2  ( yk  y j )2
                                                                 c≤α≤π                                           (39)
where ( xi , yi ) , ( x j , y j ) and ( xk , yk ) are the coordinate pairs of station i , j and k , respectively.




                                  Figure 9.
                                  Figure 9. The angle between
                                            The angle between adjacent sections in
                                                              adjacent sections       line.
                                                                                in aa line.
                                                                  →        →
    The cosine of the angle between the vectors  ji and
                                         c  arccos   jk can be easily calculated by Equation (40). So
                                                                                                    (41)
Equation (39) can be expressed by Equation (41).

                                                (xi − x j )(xk − x j ) + ( yi − y j )( yk − y j )
                                cos α = q                               q                                        (40)
                                            (xi − x j )2 + ( yi − y j )2 (xk − x j )2 + ( yk − y j )2

where (xi , yi ), (x j , y j ) and (xk , yk ) are the coordinate pairs of station i, j and k, respectively.

                                                        c ≤ arccosα ≤ π                                          (41)

      Constraint 5: Network size.

                                            l
                                           Nnodesmin ≤ Nlnodes ≤ Nnodesmax
                                                                  l
                                                                           ,l ∈ L                                (42)
                                                          X
                                              dlmin ≤             dij elij ≤ dlmax , l ∈ L                       (43)
                                                        {i,j}∈E

                                                      Nlmin ≤ |L| ≤ Nlmax                                        (44)

     Equations (42)–(44) indicate that the number of stations in line l, the length of line l and the
number of lines in the network should meet the upper and lower limits, respectively, where Nlnodes is
the number of stations in the line l.
                                             min       
                                                     {i , j }E
                                                                  ij ij        max                                  (43)

                                                    Nl min  L  Nl max                                               (3)

      Equations (42)–(44) indicate that the number of stations in line l , the length of line l and the
Sustainability                                                                                        l 23
number of2019, lines11,in6128
                           the network should meet the upper and lower limits, respectively, where 15Nof              nodes

is the number of stations in the line l .
                 6: Capacity
      Constraint 6:
     Constraint     Capacity of sections.
                             of sections.
                                     X
                                      Xg P f  C , l  L, {i, j}  E
                                          g P f
                                     wW pN p
                                                wplw wp
                                                            wpl
                                                           ij             ij
                                                    ≤ C , l ∈ L, {i, j} ∈ E                                         (45)
                                                                                                                     (45)
                                                    w wp ij                    ij
                                     w∈W p∈Np
        Equation (45) indicates that cross-sectional passenger volume of sections in each line is less than
 C ij . Equation (45) indicates that cross-sectional passenger volume of sections in each line is less
than Cij .
4. Neighborhood Search Algorithm
4. Neighborhood Search Algorithm
        The problem dealt with in this paper is NP-hard. It has high structural complexity, multiple
        The
constraints  problem    dealt
                and large        withspace,
                              search   in thisetc. So aisneighborhood
                                                paper      NP-hard. It has     highalgorithm
                                                                            search    structural[7]complexity,
                                                                                                     is developedmultiple
                                                                                                                     based
constraints    and  large  search    space, etc. So a neighborhood      search  algorithm
on a simulated annealing algorithm. A simulated annealing algorithm is a random optimization[7] is developed   based  on a
algorithm annealing
simulated      based on algorithm.
                            a Monte Carlo A simulated   annealing
                                                iterative              strategy, is
                                                           solutionalgorithm        a random
                                                                                  and           optimization
                                                                                        has strong              algorithm
                                                                                                       robustness,  global
based     on a Monte   Carlo    iterative  solution strategy,   and   has strong
convergence and wide adaptability, which is suitable for solving the problem.     robustness,   global   convergence   and
wideIn   adaptability,  which     is suitable for solving   the   problem.
           order to obtain a variety of perturbation solutions in the iteration process, four neighborhood
        In order
transform         to obtainare
               operators       a variety  of perturbation
                                   designed.  The functions  solutions   in operators
                                                                  of these  the iteration
                                                                                        areprocess,   four neighborhood
                                                                                             as follows:    adding a line
transform      operators    are   designed.    The  functions     of these  operators   are  as
randomly, deleting a line randomly, adding a section in a line randomly and deleting a section  follows:    adding  a line
                                                                                                                       in a
randomly,      deleting   a  line  randomly,   adding    a section   in a line randomly     and
line randomly, as shown in Figures 10–13. Different eighborhood transform operators are executed  deleting  a section  in a
line   randomly,
according      to aas  shownprobability.
                     certain      in Figures 10–13.   Different
                                               Different   types neighborhood
                                                                    of perturbationstransform    operators
                                                                                        are randomly         are executed
                                                                                                           applied  to the
current solution Gcurr to obtain new solution Gnew . Each operator can be executed independentlythe
according      to a  certain    probability.   Different   types    of perturbations    are  randomly      applied  to   or
current    solution   G curr  to obtain   new  solution  G  new . Each  operator   can  be executed
simultaneously, for example, one line can be added while another line can be deleted at the same        independently    or
simultaneously, for example, one line can be added while another line can be deleted at the same time.
time.




Sustainability 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEWFigure 10. Add a line randomly.
                                                                randomly.                                          16 of 23




                                                 11. Delete
                                          Figure 11.
                                          Figure               line randomly.
                                                     Delete aa line randomly.
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6128                                                                                               16 of 23
                                              Figure 11. Delete a line randomly.




                                               12. Add a section in aa line
                                        Figure 12.
                                        Figure                         line randomly.
                                                                            randomly.




                                              13. Delete
                                       Figure 13.
                                       Figure               section in
                                                  Delete aa section       line randomly.
                                                                    in aa line randomly.

                (G
       Let f (f G  curr), f (Gnewnew
                  curr  ) , f (G ) and) and       (G)best
                                           f (Gfbest   be) thebe objective
                                                                   the objective      function
                                                                                 function       values
                                                                                                   of theofcurrent
                                                                                           values            the current   solution
                                                                                                                    solution  Gcurr ,
 Gcurrnew
the    , thesolution
              new solutionGnew (perturbation        solution)
                                    Gnew (perturbation             and theand
                                                               solution)       optimal             Gbest in the
                                                                                         solutionsolution
                                                                                    the optimal                 existing
                                                                                                              Gbest in theiteration
                                                                                                                           existing
process,
iterationrespectively.                       > ff ((G
                                If f (Gnew ) If
             process, respectively.                 Gcurr) ), G   Gcurris) accepted
                                                               f (new       , Gnew isasaccepted
                                                                                         the newas current  solution.
                                                                                                      the new    currentOtherwise,
                                                                                                                          solution.
                                                     new
Gnew is accepted according to the Metropolis criterion. Metropolis criterion is that the algorithm allows
Otherwise, Gnew is accepted according to the Metropolis criterion. Metropolis criterion is that the
the inferior solution        to be accepted with a certain probability, so that the algorithm can jump out of the
algorithm      allows
trap of the local optimum.the  inferior  solution
                                       The  acceptanceto beprobability
                                                               accepted with        a certain
                                                                                in the        probability,
                                                                                       criterion            so that
                                                                                                 is calculated       the algorithm
                                                                                                                 by Equation   (46).
can jump out of the trap of the local optimum. The acceptance probability in the criterion is calculated
As the temperature decreases, the probability of accepting an inferior solution decreases gradually.
by Equation (46). As the temperature decreases, the probability of accepting an inferior solution
decreases gradually.                                   pr = e[ f (Gnew )− f (Gcurr )]/τ                                        (46)
                                                                   curr )]/
                                                [ f ( Gnew )  f (Gcurr
                                          pr  e new                                                     (46)
where τ is the current temperature.
      The algorithm is designed with the memory function of the optimal solution Gbest in the existing
iteration process, that is, to remember the ‘best so far’ state. As the iteration proceeds, the solution Gbest
in the memory base is continuously updated until the algorithm converges. Therefore, the objective
value will approach the global optimum gradually in the iterative process. A solution has many kinds
of changes after perturbation, so even if the current solution is perturbed into the solution that has
appeared in previous iterations, it will change in other directions when perturbed again, which will
not have a negative impact on the results. The overall flow of the algorithm is shown in Figure 14.
solution Gbest in the memory base is continuously updated until the algorithm converges. Therefore,
the objective value will approach the global optimum gradually in the iterative process. A solution
has many kinds of changes after perturbation, so even if the current solution is perturbed into the
solution that has appeared in previous iterations, it will change in other directions when perturbed
again, which
Sustainability       11, not
                  will
               2019,     6128have a negative impact on the results. The overall flow of the algorithm is shown
                                                                                                         17 of 23
in Figure 14.




                                 Figure 14. Overall flow chart of the algorithm.

5.            Case Application
   Real-World Case
5. Real-World      Application

5.1.       Network
     Basic Network
5.1. Basic
     Baotou, which is a prefecture-level city in Inner Mongolia, has the total area of over 2000 square
kilometers. The urban area was divided into 433 traffic zones, and 64 locations of large traffic volume
were selected in the urban central area, as shown in Figure 15. The urban passenger corridors
determined using the ‘cobweb assignment method’ are shown in Figure 16. As can be seen, the urban
passenger corridors are mainly located in the east–west axis. According to the passenger corridors
and the main axis of urban development, the basic network is formed using the method presented in
Section 2.2.1, as shown in Figure 17.
kilometers. The
kilometers.     The urban    area was
                      urban area       divided into
                                  was divided         433 traffic
                                                into 433   traffic zones,   and 64
                                                                    zones, and       locations of
                                                                                  64 locations      large traffic
                                                                                                 of large         volume
                                                                                                          traffic volume
were selected        in the urban   central area,  as shown       in Figure     15. The   urban passenger       corridors
were
were    selected
        selected     in the
                     in the  urban  central
                             urban central   area,  as  shown
                                             area, method’
                                                   as shown       in  Figure     15. The  urban    passenger     corridors
determined       using  the ‘cobweb  assignment                areinshown
                                                                      Figurein15.    The16.
                                                                                 Figure  urban
                                                                                             As canpassenger    corridors
                                                                                                      be seen, the  urban
determined
determined       using  the ‘cobweb
                 using theare
                            ‘cobweb   assignment   method’     are  shown     in Figure 16.  As  can  be seen,  the urban
passenger corridors                    located in method’
                               mainlyassignment                       axis. in
                                                               are shown
                                                    the east–west                Figure 16.toAs
                                                                              According          can
                                                                                               the    be seen, the
                                                                                                   passenger        urban
                                                                                                                corridors
passenger
passenger      corridors
               corridors   are mainly   located in  the  east–west     axis.  According    to  the  passenger    corridors
and the main      axis of are  mainly
                           urban                   thebasic
                                       located inthe
                                  development,           east–west
                                                              network         According
                                                                      axis. formed        to the
                                                                                      using    themethod
                                                                                                   passenger    corridors
                                                                                                            presented     in
and the
and   the main    axis of
           main axis       urban development,
                        of urban  development, the     basic network
                                                  the basic   network is is formed    using the
                                                                             formed using          method presented
                                                                                              the method    presented in  in
Section 2.2.1,
Sustainability        shown
                  as11,
               2019,    6128 in Figure 17.                                                                          18 of 23
          2.2.1, as
Section 2.2.1,
Section               shown in
                  as shown       Figure 17.
                              in Figure  17.




                   Figure 15. Selected locations of large traffic volume in the urban central area.
                   Figure 15. Selected
                   Figure 15.          locations  of
                                        locations of
                                                  of large
                              Selected locations     large traffic
                                                           traffic volume
                                                     large traffic volume in the urban central area.
                   Figure     Selected                                    in the urban central area.




                          Figure 16. Urban passenger corridors in the urban central area.
                          Figure 16.
                          Figure     Urban passenger
                                 16. Urban           corridors in
                                           passenger corridors in the urban central
                                                                  the urban central area.
                                                                                    area.
                          Figure 16. Urban passenger corridors in the urban central area.




                                 Figure 17. Basic network in the urban central area.
                                 Figure 17. Basic network in the urban central area.
                                 Figure 17. Basic network in the urban central area.
5.2. Parameters
5.2. Parameters
5.2. Parameters
5.2. Parameters
      In the algorithm, the annealing rate φ is set to 0.9, and the maximum number of iterations is set to
500. In this case, the passenger’s transfer sensitivity λ is set to 0. The values of other parameters in the
model are shown in Table 4.
     In the algorithm, the annealing rate  is set to 0.9, and the maximum number of iterations is
     In the algorithm, the annealing rate    is set to 0.9, and the maximum number of iterations is
set to 500. In this case, the passenger’s transfer sensitivity  is set to 0. The values of other
set to 500. In this case, the passenger’s transfer sensitivity  is set to 0. The values of other
parameters in the model are shown in Table 4.
parameters in the model are shown in Table 4.

Sustainability 2019, 11, 6128               Table 4. Parameter values in the model.                               19 of 23
                                            Table 4. Parameter values in the model.
                                           Parameter Value Parameter Value
                                           Parameter Value Parameter Value
                                               1 4. Parameter
                                            Table
                                                 1
                                                          0.65     N maxthe model.
                                                                   N lin
                                                          0.65 values l max
                                                                               6
                                                                               6
                                               22          0.35    C        45000
                                Parameter               Value0.35    Cii jj
                                                                    Parameter 45000 Value
                                              l
                                           N nodes
                                             l                15       a          3
                                      β1   N nodes  min
                                                    min 0.65 15       aNlmax      3           6
                                             l
                                      β2   N nodes  max 0.35 8         b          2
                                  l
                                             l
                                           N nodes  max        8      b Ci j      2
                                                                                           45000
                                 Nnodesmin                15              a      5            3
                                                 l
                                             d min          15 km      c         5 
                                                                                12 
                                  l
                                Nnodesmax       l
                                             d min         815 km     c b                     2
                                      l                                         12
                                                                                            12 π
                                                                                             5
                                    dmin        l
                                             d max
                                                l
                                                        15 km
                                                            35 km   m minc        0.7
                                    dlmax    d max          35 km
                                                        35 km       mCCmmin
                                                                         Cmin     0.7       0.7
                                  Nlmin      N min         3 33     mFmmin       0.65       0.65
                                             N ll min               m Fmin
                                                                      F min      0.65

     Urban Characteristic
5.3. Urban
5.3.                        Indexes
             Characteristic Indexes
5.3. Urban  Characteristic Indexes
      The trip intensity
      The        intensity in   the long-term planning
                            in the                             year   in  the  traffic  zones  is shown    in  Figure  18.
      The trip
           trip intensity in    the long-term      planning year
                                    long-term planning                in the
                                                                year in        traffic zones
                                                                          the traffic          is shown
                                                                                        zones is  shown in in Figure   18.
                                                                                                               Figure 18.
According to
According    to the  centroidcoordinates
                 thecentroid    coordinatesofofeach       trafficzone,
                                                   eachtraffic    zone,thethegravity
                                                                               gravity   center
                                                                                      center  ofof urban
                                                                                                 urban     trip
                                                                                                        trip     intensity
                                                                                                              intensity is
According to the centroid coordinates of each traffic zone, the gravity center of urban trip intensity
is calculated.
calculated.   TheThe  land-use
                   land-use      intensity
                              intensity      of
                                         of of
                                             thethe
                                                the  traffic
                                                  traffic    zones
                                                          zones      in
                                                                     thethe
                                                                  in in  the  long-term
                                                                           long-term       planning
                                                                                        planning     year
                                                                                                   year     is predicted,
                                                                                                        is predicted,   as
is calculated.  The   land-use   intensity           traffic zones            long-term    planning  year   is predicted,
as shown
shown   in  in Figure
           Figure   19. 19.
                         As As
                            we   we
                                 can can
                                      see see
                                           fromfrom    Figures
                                                  Figures   18   18 and
                                                                and  19,  19, there
                                                                          there  is a is a strong
                                                                                      strong       correlation
                                                                                              correlation        between
                                                                                                            between   the
as shown in Figure 19. As we can see from Figures 18 and 19, there is a strong correlation between
the trip
trip     intensity
     intensity       and  the land-use
                     the land-use
                andand                   intensity
                                     intensity        in the traffic
                                                 in the               zones.
the trip intensity        the land-use   intensity    in traffic zones.
                                                         the traffic  zones.




                                                    The trip
                                         Figure 18. The      intensity in traffic
                                                        trip intensity    traffic zones.
                                         Figure 18.
                                         Figure 18. The trip           in traffic zones.
                                                             intensity in         zones.




                                              19. The land-use intensity in traffic
                                       Figure 19.
                                       Figure                                       zones.
                                                                            traffic zones.
                                       Figure 19. The land-use intensity in traffic zones.

     The city is divided into multiple circles centered at the gravity center OP by the radii with different
lengths, and the difference in length between adjacent circles is 500 m. From Figure 19, we can see
that the city does not develop evenly in all directions. Therefore, it is necessary to divide the city into
different areas and calculate the fractal dimension of land-use intensity in each area separately. In this
paper, the city is divided into four areas using four quadrants, as shown in Figure 20.
                The city is divided into multiple circles centered at the gravity center O P by the radii with
          different lengths, and the difference in length between adjacent circles is 500 m . From Figure 19, we
            Sustainability 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                          20 of 23
          can see that the city does not develop evenly in all directions. Therefore, it is necessary to divide the
          city into
                  The11,different
                         city         areas into
                               is divided    and multiple    the fractal
                                                  calculatecircles       dimension
                                                                   centered          of land-use
                                                                            at the gravity        intensity
                                                                                           center O         in each area
Sustainability 2019,       6128                                                                     P by the radii with  20 of 23
          separately. In this paper, the city is divided into four areas using four quadrants, as shown in Figure
            different lengths, and the difference in length between adjacent circles is 500 m . From Figure 19, we
          20.
            can see that the city does not develop evenly in all directions. Therefore, it is necessary to divide the
            city into different areas and calculate the fractal dimension of land-use intensity in each area
            separately. In this paper, the city is divided into four areas using four quadrants, as shown in Figure
            20.




                                         Figure
                                     Figure 20. 20.          ofurban
                                                    Divisionof
                                                 Division             circlelayers
                                                               urban circle        and
                                                                              layers   areas.
                                                                                     and  areas.

     Taking Taking   logarithms
              logarithms        on both
                            on both           of of
                                          sides
                                      sides          Equation(14),
                                                  Equation      (14), Equation
                                                                      Equation    (47) cancan
                                                                                    (47)   be obtained. We can
                                                                                               be obtained.  Weseecan
                                                                                                                   thatsee that
                                       be got20.by
        the fractal dimension D p canFigure        linear of
                                                 Division    urban circle layers and areas.
                                                          regression.
the fractal dimension Dp can be got by linear regression.
                                                      P(r )  Dp(14),
                Taking logarithms on both sides oflnEquation           a0
                                                                 ln r Equation (47) can be obtained. We can see that
                                                                                                                 (47)
           the fractal dimension D p can be got byln         = Dp ln r + a0
                                                     P( )regression.
                                                   linear                                                                            (47)
          where a0 is a constant.
              The double logarithmic relationships                  r + a0
                                                        r ) = Dp ln land-use
                                                   ln P(between                                                (47)
                                                                             intensity and radii in the areas of  four
where a0 is a constant.
         quadrants     is arecorded,
                     are     constant.and     the fractal dimension of land-use intensity in each quadrant is obtained
            doublea0 logarithmic
     The where                            relationships between land-use intensity and radii in the areas of four
         by regression fitting, as shown in Figure 21. As we can see from the fitting coefficients, the calculated
quadrants    areThe
         fractal
                     double logarithmic
                   dimension and
                  recorded,                    relationships
                                        the fractal
                                   vector    of land-use
                                                              between
                                                       dimension        land-use intensity
                                                                     of land-use
                                                             intensity               intensity andinradii
                                                                                                      each
                                                                         is DP  (1.506,1.509,1.549,1.131)
                                                                                                           in quadrant
                                                                                                              the areas ofisfour
                                                                                                                             obtained by
                                                                                                                   . The fractal
           quadrants are recorded, and the fractal dimension of land-use            intensity in each quadrant is obtained
regression   fitting, as
         dimensions    areshown
                             less than in2.Figure   21. Astowe
                                            So according          can see fromReference
                                                              Equation            the fittingsource
                                                                                                 coefficients,    the we
                                                                                                                       calculated
                                                                                                                          can see fractal
           by regression    fitting, as shown    in Figure 21. As we canError!
                                                                           see from the fitting         not found.,
                                                                                                   coefficients, the calculated
dimensionthat vector
               urban  of  land-use
                       land-use          intensity
                                     intensity       is D
                                                 graduallyP =   (1.506,
                                                             decreases   1.509,
                                                                          from   1.549,
                                                                                 the      1.131
                                                                                       city      ).
                                                                                             center The
                                                                                                     to
           fractal dimension vector of land-use intensity is DP = (1.506,1.509,1.549,1.131) . The fractal
                                                                                                          fractal
                                                                                                         the        dimensions
                                                                                                               outside,  and   the are less
than 2. So   according
         decreasing   trendto   Equation
                               of the  area  (16),
                                             in the we   can
                                                     fourth   see  that
                                                            quadrant    urban
                                                                       is the    land-use
                                                                              fastest.        intensity     gradually
           dimensions are less than 2. So according to Equation Error! Reference source not found., we can see           decreases    from
the city center   to theland-use
           that urban      outside,intensity        decreasing
                                         and thegradually          trend from
                                                              decreases           area
                                                                          of thethe   cityincenter
                                                                                             the fourth
                                                                                                    to the quadrant      is the
                                                                                                              outside, and   the fastest.
            decreasing trend of the area in the fourth quadrant is the fastest.




                                        (a)                                                      (b)
            Sustainability 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                21 of 23
                                        (a)                                                    (b)




                                         (c)                                                    (d)
              Figure
      Figure 21.      21. Fractal
                  Fractal   fittingfitting of land-use
                                      of land-use       intensity in
                                                      intensity   in the   areaswithin
                                                                     theareas           different
                                                                                   within         quadrants:
                                                                                            different        (a) within
                                                                                                       quadrants:     (a) within
              quadrant  1; (b) within   quadrant 2; (c) within quadrant  3; (d) within
      quadrant 1; (b) within quadrant 2; (c) within quadrant 3; (d) within quadrant 4. quadrant  4.

            5.4. Results
                 Based on the model and algorithm, the real-world case is calculated and the optimal solution in
            the existing iteration process (called optimal solution for short) is obtained. The optimal objective
            value Z is about 8664.2. The first objective value Z1 is about 32,287 while the second objective value
             Z 2 is about 35,207. The iterative process of the algorithm is shown in Figure 22. As can be seen, the
            algorithm can converge quickly and has strong stability.
                                (c)                                                            (d)

      Figure 21. Fractal fitting of land-use intensity in the areas within different quadrants: (a) within
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6128                                                                           21 of 23
      quadrant 1; (b) within quadrant 2; (c) within quadrant 3; (d) within quadrant 4.

5.4. Results
5.4. Results
     Based on
     Based   on the model and
                the model        algorithm, the
                             and algorithm,       real-world case
                                              the real-world        is calculated
                                                                       calculated and
                                                              case is                   the optimal
                                                                                    and the         solution in
                                                                                            optimal solution in
the existing
the existing iteration  process (called
              iteration process            optimal solution
                                  (called optimal   solution for  short) isis obtained.
                                                                               obtained. The
                                                              for short)                     optimal objective
                                                                                         The optimal  objective
value  Z   is about  8664.2. The first objective value  Z  is about   32,287   while the second objective
value Z is about 8664.2. The first objective value Z1 1is about 32,287 while the second objective value   value
ZZ22 isisabout  35,207.The
          about35,207.      iterativeprocess
                        Theiterative          ofthe
                                      processof  thealgorithm
                                                     algorithm isisshown
                                                                    shown in  Figure 22.
                                                                           in Figure     As can
                                                                                     22. As     be seen,
                                                                                            can be seen, the
algorithm can converge     quickly  and  has strong stability.
                  converge quickly and has strong stability.




                                                Figure     Process of
                                                       22. Process
                                                Figure 22.         of iteration.
                                                                      iteration.

      The optimal
      The                networkisisshown
            optimal network             shownininFigure
                                                      Figure23.
                                                              23.The
                                                                   Theoptimal
                                                                        optimalnetwork
                                                                                  networkhas
                                                                                          has5 lines
                                                                                               5 lineswith
                                                                                                         witha total length
                                                                                                                a total   lengthof
110.6  km,km
of 110.6    and          details
                    thethe
                , and             of the
                             details      lines
                                      of the      is shown
                                               lines         in Table
                                                      is shown         5. The
                                                                 in Table      network
                                                                           5. The       presents
                                                                                   network         the radial
                                                                                            presents            structure
                                                                                                        the radial   structureas a
whole,   and    the   central  area  is supplemented        by a  grid-like structure. The  distance
as a whole, and the central area is supplemented by a grid-like structure. The distance between the    between     the   gravity
gravityOScenter
center       of stations’
                       O S of importance      distribution and
                                stations’ importance               the gravity
                                                             distribution   and center OP of urban
                                                                                  the gravity  centertripOintensity    is about
                                                                                                            P of urban trip
973.9 m, as shown in Figure 23. The matching degree mC between the optimal network and the urban
intensity is about 973.9 m , as shown in Figure 23. The matching degree mC between the optimal
trips is about 0.947, and the matching degree mF between the optimal network                           and the urban land
use is about 0.893. In general, the network takes the east–west direction as the main axis, the
network     and      the  urban    trips   is  about    0.947, and    the matching    degree   m F   between     and optimal
                                                                                                                        the line
network     and    the  urban    land   use   is about   0.893. In  general,  the network  takes
alignments basically follow the routes covered by the main passenger flow corridors, which conformsthe  east–west    direction
as the
to the banded
        main axis,       and the line
                    development                            the city. follow
                                         alignmentsofbasically
                                      requirement                            the routes
                                                                     The results  showed  that thebylayout
                                                                                        covered        the main
                                                                                                              of thepassenger
                                                                                                                      network
flow   corridors,
     a good match
hasSustainability      which
                         with
                  2019, 11,     conforms
                                the
                            x FOR    structure
                                  PEER         to  the  banded
                                         REVIEWof the city.        development     requirement    of  the  city.  The 22 results
                                                                                                                          of 23
showed that the layout of the network has a good match with the structure of the city.




                                                       23. The optimal
                                                Figure23.
                                               Figure          optimal network.
                                                                       network.

                                       Table 5. Details of the lines in the optimal network.

                                Line           Sequence of stations in the line          Length
                                 1       8–7–6–11–15–23–31–41–46–53–58–61–62–63          31.1 km
                                 2             13–18–19–25–32–43–41–40–39                18.8 km
                                 3           23–24–42–47–48–52–54–55–56–60               23.1 km
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6128                                                                              22 of 23



                                       Table 5. Details of the lines in the optimal network.

                                Line           Sequence of stations in the line           Length
                                 1          8–7–6–11–15–23–31–41–46–53–58–61–62–63        31.1 km
                                 2               13–18–19–25–32–43–41–40–39               18.8 km
                                 3             23–24–42–47–48–52–54–55–56–60              23.1 km
                                 4                 4–9–14–15–23–22–27–29                  16.8 km
                                 5                  2–3–5–10–21–30–29–40                  20.8 km


6. Conclusions
     In this paper, a quantitative model is developed to ensure that the generated urban rail transit
network has a good match with urban road network, trips and land-use characteristics. The main
contributions of the model are as follows:

•     The basic network, which is determined according to the main locations of large traffic volume
      and main passenger flow corridors, is constructed to ensure matching between the network and
      the urban road network. With the basic network, the search range and the search direction of the
      line alignments can be bounded while generating the transit network.
•     The matching index, which is calculated by the deviation value between two gravity centers of the
      stations’ importance distribution in the network and the traffic zones’ trip intensity, is proposed to
      constrain the matching degree between the network and the urban trip demand.
•     Similarly, the matching index, which is calculated by the deviation value between the fractal
      dimensions of stations’ importance distribution and the traffic zones’ land-use intensity, is
      proposed to constrain the matching degree between the network and the land use.

    To solve the model, a neighborhood search algorithm is developed based on the simulated
annealing method. A real-size network is calculated with the model and algorithm. The generated
network conforms to the development requirement of the city, which shows a good match between the
network and the urban characteristics.

Author Contributions: S.C.: Conceptualization, methodology and study design, writing – original draft. Q.L.:
Literature review, critical revision and editing. S.Z.: Calculation and formal analysis.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.    Fielbaum, A.; Jara-Diaz, S.; Gschwender, A. A Parametric Description of Cities for the Normative Analysis of
      Transport Systems. Netw. Spat. Econ. 2017, 17, 343–365. [CrossRef]
2.    Fielbaum, A.; Jara-Diaz, S.; Gschwender, A. Optimal public transport networks for a general urban structure.
      Transp. Res. Part B Methodol. 2016, 94, 298–313. [CrossRef]
3.    Xiang, Z.; Waller, S.T.; Rey, D.; Duell, M. Integrating uncertainty considerations into multi-objective
      transportation network design projects accounting for environment disruption. Transp. Lett. Int. J. Transp.
      Res. 2019, 11, 351–361.
4.    Cadarso, L.; Codina, E.; Escudero, L.F.; Marín, A. Rapid transit network design: Considering recovery
      robustness and risk aversion measures. Transp. Res. Procedia 2017, 22, 255–264. [CrossRef]
5.    Canca, D.; De-Los-Santos, A.; Laporte, G.; Mesa, J.A. A general rapid network design, line planning and fleet
      investment integrated model. Ann. Oper. Res. 2014, 246, 127–144. [CrossRef]
6.    Gutiérrez-Jarpa, G.; Obreque, C.; Laporte, G.; Marianov, V. Rapid transit network design for optimal cost and
      origin–destination demand capture. Comput. Oper. Res. 2013, 40, 3000–3009. [CrossRef]
7.    Canca, D.; De-Los-Santos, A.; Laporte, G.; Mesa, J.A. An adaptive neighborhood search metaheuristic for the
      integrated railway rapid transit network design and line planning problem. Comput. Oper. Res. 2017, 78,
      1–14. [CrossRef]
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6128                                                                                 23 of 23



8.    Canca, D.; De-Los-Santos, A.; Laporte, G.; Mesa, J.A. Integrated Railway Rapid Transit Network Design
      and Line Planning problem with maximum profit. Transp. Res. Part E Logist. Transp. Rev. 2019, 127, 1–30.
      [CrossRef]
9.    Laporte, G.; Marin, A.; Mesa, J.A.; Perea, F. Designing robust rapid transit networks with alternative routes.
      J. Adv. Transp. 2011, 45, 54–65. [CrossRef]
10.   Cadarso, L.; Marín, Á. Improved rapid transit network design model: Considering transfer effects. Ann.
      Oper. Res. 2017, 258, 547–567. [CrossRef]
11.   Marín, Á.; García-Ródenas, R. Location of infrastructure in urban railway networks. Comput. Oper. Res. 2009,
      36, 1461–1477. [CrossRef]
12.   Gallo, M.; Montella, B.; D’Acierno, L. The transit network design problem with elastic demand and
      internalisation of external costs: An application to rail frequency optimisation. Transp. Res. Part C Emerg.
      Technol. 2011, 19, 1276–1305. [CrossRef]
13.   López-Ramos, F.; Codina, E.; Marín, Á.; Guarnaschelli, A. Integrated approach to network design and
      frequency setting problem in railway rapid transit systems. Comput. Oper. Res. 2017, 80, 128–146. [CrossRef]
14.   Laporte, G.; Mesa, J.A. The design of rapid transit networks. In Location Science; Springer: Basel, Switzerland,
      2015; pp. 581–594.
15.   Baum-Snow, N.; Kahn, M.E.; Voith, R. Effects of Urban Rail Transit Expansions: Evidence from Sixteen Cities,
      1970–2000. Brook.-Whart. Pap. Urban Aff. 2005, 2005, 147–206. [CrossRef]
16.   Baum-Snow, N.; Kahn, M.E. The effects of new public projects to expand urban rail transit. J. Public Econ.
      2000, 77, 241–263. [CrossRef]
17.   Dröes, M.I.; Rietveld, P. Rail-based public transport and urban spatial structure: The interplay between
      network design, congestion and urban form. Transp. Res. Part B 2015, 81, 421–439. [CrossRef]
18.   Laporte, G.; Mesa, J.A.; Perea, F. A game theoretic framework for the robust railway transit network design
      problem. Transp. Res. Part B Methodol. 2010, 44, 447–459. [CrossRef]
19.   Freeman, L.C. Centrality in social networks conceptual clarification. Soc. Netw. 1978, 1, 215–239. [CrossRef]
20.   Kourtellis, N.; Alahakoon, T.; Simha, R.; Iamnitchi, A.; Tripathi, R. Identifying high betweenness centrality
      nodes in large social networks. Soc. Netw. Anal. Min. 2013, 3, 899–914. [CrossRef]
21.   Mandelbrot, B. How long is the coast of britain? Statistical self-similarity and fractional dimension. Science
      1967, 156, 636–638. [CrossRef]
22.   Benguigui, L.; Daoud, M. Is the suburban railway system a fractal? Geogr. Anal. 1991, 23, 362–368. [CrossRef]
23.   Levinson, D. Network structure and city size. PLoS ONE 2012, 7, e29721. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

                           © 2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
                           article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
                           (CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
