                                                Line planning under crowding: A cut-and-column
                                                              generation approach
                                                             Yahan Lu,a, b Rolf N. van Lieshout,c Layla Martin,c, d Lixing Yanga
                                                                a
                                                                  School of Systems Science, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, 100044, China;
arXiv:2501.13819v1 [math.OC] 23 Jan 2025




                                                               b
                                                               Department of Transport & Planning, Delft University of Technology, Netherlands;
                                            c
                                              Department of Operations, Planning, Accounting, and Control, School of Industrial Engineering, Eindhoven University of
                                                                                      Technology, Eindhoven, Netherlands;
                                                        d
                                                          Eindhoven AI Systems Institute, Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, Netherlands


                                                Problem definition: To mitigate excessive crowding in public transit networks, network expansion is often
                                                not feasible due to financial and time constraints. Instead, operators are required to make use of existing
                                                infrastructure more efficiently. In this regard, this paper considers the problem of determining lines and
                                                frequencies in a public transit system, factoring in the impact of crowding. Methodology: We introduce
                                                a novel formulation to address the line planning problem under crowding and propose a mixed-integer
                                                second-order cone programming (MI-SOCP) reformulation. Three variants of the cut-and-column generation
                                                algorithm with tailored acceleration techniques find near-system-optimal solutions by dynamically generating
                                                passenger routes and adding linear cutting planes to deal with the non-linearity introduced by the crowding
                                                terms. We find integral solutions using a diving heuristic. In practice, passengers may deviate from system-
                                                optimal routes. We, thus, evaluate line plans by computing a user-equilibrium routing based on Wardrop’s
                                                first principle. Results and implications: We experimentally evaluate the performance of the proposed
                                                approaches on both an artificial network and the Beijing metro network. The results demonstrate that our
                                                algorithm effectively scales to large-scale instances involving hundreds of stations and candidate lines, and
                                                nearly 57,000 origin-destination pairs. We find that considering crowding while developing line plans can
                                                significantly reduce crowding, at only a minor expense to the travel time passengers experience. This holds
                                                both for system-optimal passenger routing and user-optimal passenger routing, which only differ slightly.

                                                Key words : Line planning, mixed-integer second-order cone programming, outer approximation, cutting
                                                  planes, column generation, crowding effects




                                           1.     Introduction
                                           Public transit passengers not only value fast and direct connections but also comfortable travel.
                                           Particularly, passengers prefer not to travel along highly crowded trajectories. However, due to the
                                           quickly growing population in metropolitan areas – the UN expects 70% of the world’s population
                                           of then 9.7 billion to live in metropolitan areas by 2050 (United Nations 2019) – public transit
                                           becomes increasingly crowded. High set-up costs and times make it impossible to adapt to this
                                           growth simply by extending and densifying the network. Public transit operators can, however, work
                                           towards utilizing the given rail network better by optimizing their planning. Especially changes to
                                           the line concept, the set of lines that are operated and their frequencies, can potentially alleviate

                                                                                                       1
                                     Lu et al.: Line planning under crowding: A cut-and-column generation approach
2

crowding, as these directly influence the routes taken by passengers. Therefore, in this paper, we
focus on incorporating crowding considerations within the line planning decision, i.e., within a
given network, deciding which lines to operate at which frequencies while considering passengers’
travel time and crowding costs.
    In real-world public transit networks such as the Beijing metro, with hundreds of stations and
direct rails, determining the line concept is a challenging problem since passengers often transfer
between different lines. This requires explicitly modeling transfers between lines and all possible
routes that a passenger could take. Considering crowding in line planning further exacerbates
complexity since it introduces interactions between passengers: The more passengers use the same
train, the more severe the passengers perceive crowding. This poses a significant challenge in
modeling crowding since the perceived travel time, which is defined as the sum of travel time and
crowding penalty, is no longer linear. Additionally, passengers might not travel in a centrally-
optimal fashion through the network of public transit lines but rather find their own route.
    To tackle these challenges, we develop a novel line planning model based on the change-and-
go network introduced in Schöbel and Scholl (2005) to trace the routes passengers take through
the network. We model the impact of crowding on a passenger’s perceived travel time as a linear
function of the utilization of a train, resulting in a crowding term that is quadratic in the number
of passengers, and inversely proportional to the frequency of that particular train. Through a
convex reformulation based on second-order cone constraints, we obtain a computationally tractable
mathematical model. We further observe that incorporating crowding effects into line planning
generates several routes with similar perceived travel times. This results in small gaps between
the system-optimal and user-optimal line plans, indicating that integrating user-optimal routing
in line planning offers limited benefits. Therefore, we omit passengers’ selfish route choices during
the line planning optimization process but evaluate their impact ex-post.
    To solve the proposed line planning model at scale, we initially relax the cone constraints and
start with a small subset of passengers’ routes. Next, linear cuts (rows) are added if the cone con-
straints are violated, while routes (columns) are added if we find any negative reduced-cost routes
through a pricing problem. Regarding the dynamic addition order of rows and columns, we de-
velop two additional procedures: one that adds columns before rows and another that always adds
columns and rows in each iteration. We obtain integral solutions using a tailored diving heuristic,
which iteratively fixes lines with the highest frequency. Additionally, we develop acceleration tech-
niques: We employ Farkas duals to deal with the infeasibility of the restricted master problem and
remove non-tight cutting planes and columns with positive reduced costs where necessary.
    We test our approach using real-life instances from the entire Beijing metro network, one of
the largest and most crowded systems in the world, consisting of 534 candidate lines and 56,916
Lu et al.: Line planning under crowding: A cut-and-column generation approach
                                                                                                    3

origin-destination (OD) pairs. To create smaller instances, we extract the central subnetwork, which
includes 168 candidate lines and 23,374 OD pairs. Additionally, we evaluate our approach on the
most common benchmark in the line planning literature, the 5 × 5-grid network (e.g., Friedrich et al.
2017b, Schiewe, Schiewe, and Schmidt 2019, Schiewe and Schöbel 2020), where we generate a line
pool with 128 lines. For the instances based on the grid network, the best procedure of our algorithm
achieves an average optimality gap of less than 1.8% compared to the optimal solutions obtained
by GUROBI, while reducing the average computational time by more than 98.6%. When solving
the instance for the Beijing metro entire network without crowding effects, we are able to obtain
the solution within 2.2 hours using the proposed algorithm. We solve instances on both the Beijing
subnetwork and the entire network under crowding, obtaining higher-quality solutions that reduce
passengers’ perceived travel times compared to the existing line plan used in real-world operations.
  Extensive computational studies provide valuable insights into the benefits of incorporating
crowding effects in line planning. In particular, the results show that incorporating crowding effects
in line planning considerably reduces crowding, even when the crowding factor is small. Moreover,
by incorporating crowding effects into line planning, passengers’ perceived travel time is reduced
with only minor increases in travel time. Lastly, we show that the system-optimal routing only
deviates slightly from the user-equilibrium, implying that the impact of ignoring passengers’ selfish
route choices during the optimization is limited.
  To summarize, our contributions are four-fold:
  1. We introduce the line planning problem under crowding, which models crowding using a
quadratic penalty term.
  2. Through a convex reformulation, we obtain a computationally tractable mixed-integer second-
order cone program (MI-SOCP), which we solve using a cut-and-column generation framework.
  3. We demonstrate that our algorithm obtains near-optimal solutions in a short computation
time compared to GUROBI and is able to solve real-life instances.
  4. From a practical standpoint, extensive numerical studies provide various managerial insights
into line planning problems.
  The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review the literature related
to this study. Section 3 formally introduces the line planning problem under crowding and presents
the mathematical formulation. Subsequently, we present our solution approach, discussing the
reformulation, the cut-generation method, and the cut-and-column generation algorithm in Section
4. Section 5 proposes a model to evaluate the user equilibrium given the line plan. In Section 6,
we discuss the numerical results, including those based on the grid network and the Beijing metro
system. Lastly, Section 7 concludes this paper.
                                         Lu et al.: Line planning under crowding: A cut-and-column generation approach
4

2.     Literature review
This paper merges two streams of literature on public transit systems: line planning that considers
passenger routing and the effects of crowding on the public transit system. Section 2.1 reviews
line planning and describes how passenger routing can be integrated. We refer to Schöbel (2012)
and Schmidt and Schöbel (2024) for a broader overview of the line planning literature. Section 2.2
describes how existing literature models the effects of crowding within the planning phases of public
transit.

2.1.    Line planning with passenger routing
The     well-studied   line   planning    problem      usually     selects    several    lines    from     a   given
line pool (Gattermann, Harbering, and Schöbel 2017). Early contributions in line plan-
ning models exclusively focus on physical infrastructure and operational aspects (e.g.,
Goossens, Van Hoesel, and Kroon 2004, 2006). The goal is to find a line concept that serves all
customers and minimizes operating costs for public transit companies.
    More recent models have shifted towards a stronger focus on the passengers’ preferences and
objectives. Most of the related literature focuses on line planning with system-optimal routes,
in parts integrated with other decisions such as network design (Canca et al. 2019), timetabling
(Van Lieshout, Bouman, and Huisman 2020), or the integration of timetabling and vehicle schedul-
ing (Schöbel 2017). In these problems, the operator chooses lines that optimize their objective
(e.g., profit, costs, service level) by assigning passengers to routes. This stream of literature can be
divided into two substreams. The first substream maximizes the number of passengers traveling
without transfers. Those who must make transfers to reach their destinations are often overlooked.
For example, the first model in Bertsimas, Ng, and Yan (2021) takes passengers with direct routes
into account and maximizes the total demand that can be served by the line plan, where capacity
limitations are disregarded. In this model, passenger preferences are limited to either choosing a
direct route or forgoing being served.
    The second substream minimizes the total travel time of passengers, taking routes with transfers
into account. Operating costs usually translate to budget constraints, while capacity limitations
are either discarded or formulated as hard constraints. Tracking passengers’ travel time on each
available route, Schöbel and Scholl (2005) propose the change-and-go network (CGN). This net-
work representation allows for characterizing passenger transfer behavior precisely and formulating
passengers’ travel time as a function of both in-vehicle time and transfer penalties. For exam-
ple, Friedrich et al. (2017b) present a line planning model incorporating hard capacity constraints,
wherein passenger assignment is integrated into cost-optimal line planning. This model ensures
that the average length of the considered routes does not exceed a specified percentage increase
Lu et al.: Line planning under crowding: A cut-and-column generation approach
                                                                                                    5

compared to the shortest route. The authors test this model on the 5 × 5-grid network with up
to 275 lines in the line pool. As an alternative to modeling based on the CGN, Yao, Nie, and Fu
(2024) propose a two-phase solution approach for the railway line planning problem with passen-
ger routing using a direct-connection network. In this model, the capacity of lines and trains is
ignored and the requirement to serve all passengers is relaxed. The line planning model proposed
in Bertsimas, Ng, and Yan (2021) uses yet another modeling alternative, which considers routes
with at most one transfer. In this model, the travel time for routes with a transfer is constrained by
an exogenous threshold. Routes are all pre-computed outside the optimization process. Moreover,
this model discards capacity limitations and aims to maximize the number of demands served by
the transit network.
  Beyond the aforementioned approach of pre-computing passengers’ routes outside of the opti-
mization framework, Borndörfer, Grötschel, and Pfetsch (2007) use a column generation algorithm
to dynamically generate passenger routes in the physical network within the optimization process.
They develop a mixed-integer model aimed at minimizing the sum of passengers’ travel costs and
operators’ costs. However, this model excludes transfer penalties and overlooks capacity limitations
on lines.
  More recently, the line planning literature moved away from assigning passengers to routes and
rather explicitly models passenger route choice using discrete choice models and Nash equilibria
(Schmidt 2012, Hartleb et al. 2023). For example, Goerigk and Schmidt (2017) propose a bi-level
model based on the CGN for the line planning problem that incorporates user-optimal route choices.
In this model, passenger routes are generated prior to optimization, and capacity limitations are
explicitly formulated as hard constraints. The travel time of passengers is formulated as a func-
tion associated with in-vehicle travel time and transfer penalties. The authors develop a genetic
algorithm to solve large-scale instances. Schiewe, Schiewe, and Schmidt (2019) interpret line plan-
ning as a game in which passengers are players striving to minimize their individual objective
functions, which comprise travel time, transfer penalties, and a share of the overall solution cost,
while accounting for hard capacity constraints. Both methods face numerical difficulties due to the
interaction terms’ bi-level nature and non-convexity.
  While the line planning literature has moved towards more detailed modeling of passenger pref-
erences by either minimizing or constraining the overall travel time or transfers, passengers are
not only sensitive to physical aspects of their journey but also travel comfort, such as crowding.
We thus integrate the effects of crowding on the perceived travel time of passengers in the line
planning problem and model the impact of crowding as soft-capacity constraints. In addition, cur-
rent algorithms addressing line planning problems exhibit limitations in scalability. Consequently,
we develop a cut-and-column generation approach designed to solve real-life instances involving
                                      Lu et al.: Line planning under crowding: A cut-and-column generation approach
6

hundreds of stations, hundreds of candidate lines in the line pool, and tens of thousands of OD
pairs.

2.2.     Crowding effects in public transit planning
More passengers on the same train reduces travel comfort. This has not been considered in the con-
text of line planning and is usually modeled using hard capacity constraints in other public transit
decisions, such as timetabling (e.g., Cacchiani, Qi, and Yang 2020, Yin et al. 2021, Lu et al. 2022,
2023), vehicle scheduling (e.g., Xia, Ma, and Sharif Azadeh 2024, Chai et al. 2024), and charging
(e.g., De Vos, Van Lieshout, and Dollevoet 2024).
    The literature that precisely models the effects of crowding on passengers’ travel discomfort in
public transit planning process is quite limited. Jiang, Rasmussen, and Nielsen (2022) formulate
a mixed integer nonlinear programming (MINLP) model for the timetabling problem in a transit
network offering both schedule- and frequency-based services. This model incorporates different
in-vehicle travel times for passengers, whether seated or standing, using a piecewise linear function.
Luan and Corman (2022) present a MINLP formulation to reschedule trains and reroute passen-
gers, incorporating crowding effects into system-optimal passenger movements. They assume that
crowding effects do not come into play if every passenger has a seat but increase stepwise otherwise.
These effects are modeled as a piecewise constant function within the formulation.
    The freight transport literature considers crowding more frequently. More vehicles on the same
road increase the travel time (e.g., Daganzo 1997, Franceschetti et al. 2018), drivers reroute ac-
cordingly, and thus road network planners include crowding. Similarly, network design and location
decisions in centrally planned logistics systems benefit from considering crowding if demand is
stochastic (e.g. Bayram, Yıldız, and Farham 2023, Kınay, Gzara, and Alumur 2023). For exam-
ple, Basciftci and Van Hentenryck (2023) consider the crowding effects on hub location decisions,
factoring in strict capacity limitations. The authors employ the Kleinrock function to model each
hub as an M/M/1 queue under steady-state conditions, thereby formulating the crowding effects
as a nonlinear cost function.
    We add to this literature stream by considering crowding in a decision-making problem that
previously ignored these effects. We propose a novel crowding effect function and develop an efficient
cutting-plane method to address the computational challenges arising from the quadratic crowding
terms. Additionally, we design three procedures within the cut-and-column generation approach to
efficiently handle the quadratic crowding terms when dealing with an enormous number of columns
simultaneously.
Lu et al.: Line planning under crowding: A cut-and-column generation approach
                                                                                                                 7

3.    Problem statement
In this paper, we consider the line planning problem under crowding (LPP-C). We first present
the underlying public transit network (PTN) and then introduce the corresponding change-and-go
network (CGN) in line with Schöbel and Scholl (2005). We subsequently explain the LPP-C in
greater detail. Lastly, we formulate the problem as a mathematical model with a nonlinear objective
function.

Network
A PTN is a graph G = (S, E) with a set of vertices S representing stations and a set of edges E
representing tracks between two stations. A line is a simple path in G, and all potential lines are
given by the line pool L. This line pool is a subset of all simple paths. Each station should be
served by at least one line; if multiple lines pass a station i ∈ S, this station is a possible transfer
location.
  To track passengers changing between lines and account for the inconvenience associated with
transfers, we cast the PTN into a CGN. A CGN is a graph G = (N , A), where N refers to the set
of nodes in the CGN. The node set N comprises the set of station nodes S and the set of travel
nodes N t . We generate a node in the CGN for each station-line (s, l) tuple such that s ∈ l allows
us to track passengers transferring between lines explicitly. An example of a four-station PTN and
its corresponding CGN with four station nodes and six transfer nodes is given in Figure ??. The
set A contains travel arcs At and transfer arcs Ac . Each travel arc a ∈ At incurs a perceived cost
comprising the travel time and a crowding penalty. The latter negatively correlates with frequency
and positively depends on the utilization. In contrast, transfer arcs only incur a fixed cost ca for
making a transfer.

The line planning problem under crowding
As    in    most    line   planning      models,     we     assume     the      line   pool is   defined a   priori
(Van Lieshout, Bouman, and Huisman 2020). From the line pool L including a set of candidate
lines connecting stations in a public transit system, the operator determines which lines to operate
at what frequency. The operator aims to minimize passengers’ perceived travel times by operating
lines subject to a budget constraint B such that all demand is served.
  Once the lines have been established, passengers join the system and travel from origin to
destination. We thus aggregate interchangeable passengers with the same origin and destination.
We denote the passenger demand by the set P ⊆ S × S, which includes the passengers’ origin and
destination, and use np for the positive passenger demand of p ∈ P . Every passenger is assigned
to a route, which is a directed path in the CGN that starts from the station node corresponding
to the passengers’ origin, passes through various nodes and arcs, and arrives at the station node
                                        Lu et al.: Line planning under crowding: A cut-and-column generation approach
8

                                                     Line 1

                                        A              C             D

                                                B          Line 2

                                                     (a) PTN
           A- Line 1                                                C- Line 1                 D - Line 1



              A                                                          C                        D

                                            B
                                                                                                Travel arc
                                                                                                Transfer arc

           A- Line 2                    B - Line 2                   C - Line 2

                                                     (b) CGN
Figure 1     An illustrative PTN and CGN.


corresponding to the destination. Along this route, passengers can transfer between different lines.
We incorporate crowding effects into line planning, minimizing a perceived travel time function of
passengers comprising travel time and crowding penalty.

Mathematical formulation
To formulate the LPP-C, we first introduce a mathematical model with a nonlinear objective
function. We introduce the parameter L(e) to represent the set of lines passing through edge e ∈ E
in the PTN. Let R, Ra , Rp , Rpa denote the set of possible routes for all OD pairs, the set of routes
passing arc a ∈ A, the set of possible routes for OD pair p ∈ P , and the set of routes for OD pair p
which pass arc a. Let dℓ and eℓ denote the operational costs and set-up costs of line ℓ, respectively.
Let ℓ(a) represent the line ℓ to which arc a belongs. We define the parameter γa > 0 to represent the
crowding factor, which depends on the capacity of the vehicle that operates on ℓ(a). The budget is
denoted as B, and the minimum and maximum frequency of line ℓ are denoted as fℓmin and fℓmax ,
respectively. Four types of decision variables represent the line plan and the passenger flows:
    (i) yℓ : Continuous variables representing the frequency of line ℓ ∈ L,
    (ii) wℓ : Binary variables indicating whether line ℓ ∈ L is operated in the solution or not,
    (iii) xa : Continuous decision variables representing the total number of passengers using arc
a ∈ A,
    (iv) zr : Continuous decision variables indicating the number of passengers that choose route
r ∈ R.
Lu et al.: Line planning under crowding: A cut-and-column generation approach
                                                                                                      9

  Then, the LPP-C can be formulated as follows:
              X                  X          γa x2a
      min           ca xa +                                                                        (1a)
              a∈A             a∈A:yℓ(a)>0
                                            yℓ(a)
             X
      s.t.         (dℓ yℓ + eℓ wℓ ) ≤ B                                                            (1b)
             ℓ∈L
                         X
                                 wℓ ≥ 1                ∀e ∈ E,                                     (1c)
                        ℓ∈L(e)

                         fℓmin wℓ ≤ yℓ ≤ fℓmax wℓ      ∀ ℓ ∈ L,                                    (1d)
                                    X
                               xa =      zr            ∀a ∈ A,                                     (1e)
                                       r∈Ra
                          X
                                 zr ≤ np wℓ(a)         ∀a ∈ A, p ∈ P ,                             (1f)
                            p
                         r∈Ra
                          X
                                 zr = np               ∀p ∈ P ,                                    (1g)
                          r∈Rp

                                 wℓ ∈ {0, 1}           ∀ ℓ ∈ L,                                    (1h)

                                 xa ≥ 0                ∀a ∈ A,                                      (1i)

                                 yℓ ≥ 0                ∀ ℓ ∈ L,                                     (1j)

                                 zr ≥ 0                ∀r ∈ R.                                     (1k)

The objective function (1a) minimizes the total perceived travel times of passengers. Constraint
(1b) ensures that the operational and set-up costs of the operated lines remain within the budget.
Constraints (1c) ensure that every edge in the PTN has at least one line passing through it.
Constraints (1d) link variables yℓ and wℓ , enforcing that operated lines have a frequency between
fℓmin and fℓmax and 0 otherwise. Constraints (1e) link the arc flows to the route variables, making sure
that the flow through an arc equals the flow over all routes passing through this arc. Constraints
(1f) restrict passengers to use arcs that belong to operated lines ℓ, i.e., for all ℓ with wℓ = 1.
Constraints (1g) ensure that all passengers are routed. Constraints (1h) – (1k) define the domains
of the decision variables.

4.    Solution methodologies
Formulation (1) cannot be used to solve realistic instances using standard commercial solvers
because (i) the set over which we sum in the crowding penalty term in the objective function
depends on the values of the decision variables and (ii) the number of routes for every OD pair may
be enormous. To deal with (i), Section 4.1 reformulates the problem as a mixed-integer second-
order cone program (MI-SOCP). Section 4.2 describes how this MI-SOCP can be solved using a
cutting-plane approach. To handle (ii), Section 4.3 shows how routes can be generated dynamically
using column generation. Section 4.4 introduces three variants of the proposed cut-and-column
                                                Lu et al.: Line planning under crowding: A cut-and-column generation approach
10

generation approach, which integrates the two algorithms described above. Lastly, Section 4.5
presents the diving heuristic to obtain integral solutions.

4.1.     Reformulation as a mixed-integer second-order cone program
To reformulate the problem as an MI-SOCP, we introduce auxiliary decision variables Θa for all
a ∈ A that serve as the crowding penalty incurred on arc a in the objective function. To ensure
that these variables take the right value, we add a set of rotated second-order cone constraints. In
the reformulation, we no longer need constraints (1f) to couple decision variables z and w. This
results in the following formulation:
              X               X
       min          ca xa +         Θa                                                                                 (2a)
              a∈A             a∈A
              X
       s.t.         (dℓ yℓ + eℓ wℓ ) ≤ B                                                                               (2b)
              ℓ∈L
                          Θa yℓ(a) ≥ γa x2a               ∀a ∈ A,                                                       (2c)
                          X
                               wℓ ≥ 1                     ∀e ∈ E,                                                      (2d)
                         ℓ∈L(e)

                          fℓmin wℓ ≤ yℓ ≤ fℓmax wℓ        ∀ ℓ ∈ L,                                                      (2e)
                                     X
                                xa =      zr              ∀a ∈ A,                                                       (2f)
                                         r∈Ra
                           X
                                  zr = np                 ∀p ∈ P ,                                                     (2g)
                           r∈Rp

                                  wℓ ∈ {0, 1}             ∀ ℓ ∈ L,                                                     (2h)

                                  xa ≥ 0                  ∀a ∈ A,                                                       (2i)

                                    yℓ ≥ 0                ∀ ℓ ∈ L,                                                      (2j)

                                  zr ≥ 0                  ∀r ∈ R,                                                      (2k)

                                Θa ≥ 0                    ∀a ∈ A.                                                       (2l)

     Constraints (2c) are the most important constraints in Formulation (2). If yℓ(a) = 0, these con-
straints force xa = 0 and if yℓ(a) > 0, they ensure that Θa ≥ γa x2a /yℓ(a) . These constraints are
nonlinear, but, together with the conditions that yℓ(a) ≥ 0 and Θa ≥ 0 for all a, describe a rotated
second-order cone, which is convex. The remaining constraints follow from the original formulation
(1).

4.2.     Cutting planes for SOCP constraints
Mixed-integer second-order cone programs can be solved directly by most contemporary commercial
solvers. As a faster alternative, the rotated second-order cone constraints can be handled using
cutting planes that also integrate well with column generation. In this method, the cone constraints
Lu et al.: Line planning under crowding: A cut-and-column generation approach
                                                                                                         11

are relaxed, yielding a linear formulation, and tangent cuts are added on-the-fly when violations
of the constraints are detected, as formalized in the following proposition:

  Proposition 1 (Cut Generation). Given a point (Θ̂, x̂, ŷ) where ŷa > 0 for some a ∈ A, the
following cut is valid:
     Θa     2x̂a        x̂2
         ≥        xa − 2 a yℓ(a) .                                                                       (3)
      γa   ŷℓ(a)     ŷℓ(a)
  Proof.     We will show that this cut does not eliminate any feasible solutions of Formulation (2).
We omit indices for brevity. Let (Θ, x, y) denote a feasible solution. If y = 0, it must be that
Θ = x = 0, and (3) is satisfied. If y > 0, constraint (2c) becomes Θ/γ ≥ f (x, y), where f (x, y) = x2 /y.
Since f (x, y) is convex, given the point (x̂, ŷ), it holds that

                             f (x, y) ≥ f (x̂, ŷ) + fx (x̂, ŷ)(x − x̂) + fy (x̂, ŷ)(y − ŷ),

where f· denotes the subgradient. Therefore, we have
    Θ               x̂2 2x̂         x̂2
       ≥ f (x, y) ≥     + (x − x̂) − 2 (y − ŷ)
     γ               ŷ  ŷ         ŷ
                    2x̂    x̂2
                  ≥ x − 2 y,
                     ŷ    ŷ
which corresponds to (3). 
  Our algorithm checks for constraint violation and adds these linear cuts when necessary. In case
yl = 0 for some violated constraint, we replace yl by yl + ε for some small ε before computing the
cut.

4.3.    Column generation
The other challenge of solving Formulation (2) lies in the enormous set of routes Rp for each OD
pair p ∈ P when the network is large, which results in a huge number of variables. However, the
challenge can be handled efficiently using the column generation algorithm.

  4.3.1.     Iterative process of the column generation algorithm Our column generation
algorithm proceeds iteratively as follows. First, we begin with a restricted set of routes R ⊂ R
and the corresponding subset of variables. We solve the restricted master problem (RMP), which is
Formulation (2) on R where we additionally relax the integer condition on w and remove constraints
(2c) to obtain an optimal primal and dual solution to the RMP. Then, to see if the solution is also
optimal with respect to the full set of routes R, we solve the pricing problem (PP) by searching
for the route r ∈ R with the smallest reduced cost given the current dual variables. For any given
route r for OD pair p, the reduced cost ψrp can be expressed as ψrp = −λp +
                                                                               P
                                                                                   ϑa , where ϑa is
                                                                                                  a∈Ar
the dual of constraints (2f), and λp is the dual of constraints (2g). For each p ∈ P , we can find the
route r ∗ that minimizes the reduced cost by solving a shortest-path problem on a directed acyclic
graph. If ψrp∗ < 0, adding r ∗ to R can improve the current solution. If ψrp∗ ≥ 0 for all p ∈ P , the
current solution is optimal.
                                      Lu et al.: Line planning under crowding: A cut-and-column generation approach
12

  4.3.2.     Initialization and dealing with infeasibility To initialize the column generation
algorithm, we include the shortest route in the CGN for each OD pair in R. Given the restricted
number of routes in R, the RMP may become infeasible. This issue would also arise in the process
of finding integral solutions due to the possible absence of routes for certain OD pairs in the line
plan with all integral frequencies. The infeasibility arises from constraints (2g) not being satisfied
and the associated dual problem being unbounded. During column generation, utilizing Farkas
pricing enables the restoration of the feasibility of the RMP (Kowalczyk and Leus 2018). To be
more precise, we retrieve the Farkas duals of the constraints (2f) and (2g), use them to solve the
pricing problem, add routes to the RMP, and solve the RMP again. We repeat these procedures
until we have shown that the RMP is feasible.

4.4.     An overview of the algorithm
We investigate three variants of the cut-and-column generation approach:
     (i) First-Cut-Then-Price (FCTP). After solving the RMP, this method first identifies and adds
violated cuts, and only calls the pricing problem if no cuts are added.
     (ii) First-Price-Then-Cut (FPTC). Conversely, this method always calls the pricing problem
after solving the RMP, and only adds cuts if there are no negative reduced cost columns.
     (iii) Always-Price-And-Cut (APAC). The final method always calls both the pricing and the
cutting procedure after solving the RMP.
     To limit the size of the models, we apply both cut and column management. In every proposed
variant, each time the cut generation method is called, we identify the tight cuts, save them for the
next iteration, and eliminate the slack ones so as to further speed up the computation. Additionally,
after each pricing procedure, we compute the average number of routes with respect to all OD
pairs. If this measure exceeds a predetermined threshold (denoted as ∆1 ), we remove routes whose
reduced costs exceed a positive threshold value ∆2 .
     Termination options for this heuristic involve solving the RMP to optimality or stopping the
column generation process before the optimal solution of the RMP is reached to avoid the tail-
off effect. Here, we terminate the column generation process if the relative improvement in the
objective value of the RMP over the last I iterations falls below ǫ. These parameters dynamically
adapt during the solution process.

4.5.     Diving heuristic
To obtain integral solutions, we utilize the diving heuristic to perform a heuristic search in the
branch-and-bound tree. The diving heuristic iteratively executes a column generation phase and
a fixing phase until it yields an integral solution. Specifically, after a column generation phase, we
round up the fractional line variable wℓ whose corresponding frequency variable yℓ is the largest.
Lu et al.: Line planning under crowding: A cut-and-column generation approach
                                                                                                     13

Thereafter, we check whether the remaining budget is sufficient to operate another line at its
minimum frequency. If the budget is sufficient, we continue the search by solving the RMP again.
If not, the diving heuristic terminates.
  Since we use an early stopping criterion to solve the RMP, it is possible that there are still
negative reduced cost routes that can improve the objective, whilst keeping the line variables fixed.
Therefore, after terminating the diving heuristic, we reoptimize the RMP and resolve the pricing
problem until no negative reduced cost routes can be found.

5.    Evaluating the user equilibrium
Given a line plan, we are interested in evaluating the user equilibrium considering the crowding
effects. The user equilibrium principle of Wardrop states that each passenger strives to minimize
their individual perceived travel times and will collectively reach an equilibrium state where no
passenger has an incentive to change their chosen route. Given a solution y∗ , let A∗ denote the
                             ∗
set of all arcs a such that yl(a) > 0, and define the function da (xa ) := ca + yγa xa for the perceived
                                                                                       l(a)

travel cost on each arc a ∈ A∗ . To formally define the equilibrium conditions, let the continuous
variable τ p represent the travel costs in the equilibrium state of each OD pair p ∈ P and let the
continuous variable hr represent the travel cost of each route r in R. A routing z is an equilibrium
if (x, τ ) exist such that the following conditions are satisfied (Wardrop 1952):
       X
            zr = np                                               ∀p ∈ P ,
      r∈Rp
                    X
             xa =          zr                                              ∀a ∈ A∗ ,
                    r∈Ra
                    X
             hr =         da (xa )                                          ∀r ∈ R,
                    a∈r
       zr > 0 ⇒ hr = τ p                                           ∀p ∈ P , r ∈ Rp ,
       zr = 0 ⇒ hr ≥ τ p                                           ∀p ∈ P , r ∈ Rp .

These conditions are non-linear and, therefore, hard to solve directly. However, as shown in Propo-
sition 18.11 in Roughgarden (2007), we can find an equilibrium routing by solving the following
optimization problem:
           X Z xa
    min            da (s)ds                                                                        (4a)
              a∈A∗     0
                      X
      s.t.    xa =              zr ∀a ∈ A∗ ,                                                       (4b)
                     r∈Ra
               X
                     zr = np ∀p ∈ P ,                                                              (4c)
              r∈Rp

              xa ≥ 0               ∀a ∈ A∗ ,                                                       (4d)
              zr ≥ 0               ∀r ∈ R.                                                         (4e)
                                        Lu et al.: Line planning under crowding: A cut-and-column generation approach
14

For any continuous and non-decreasing function da (xa ), the objective function is both continuously
differentiable and convex. For our case, the integral evaluates to:
                                                   !
       X Z xa              X Z xa            γa
               da (s)ds =             ca + ∗ s ds
      a∈A∗ 0              a∈A∗ 0
                                            yℓ(a)
                               "                # xa
                           X             γa 2
                        =       ca s + ∗ s
                          a∈A∗
                                       2yℓ(a)
                           X            X γa 0
                        =      ca xa +         ∗
                                                    x2a .                                                        (5)
                          a∈A∗         a∈A∗
                                            2y ℓ(a)

Therefore, for a given line plan, we can find its corresponding user equilibrium by solving a convex
quadratic problem. Note that since the objective function and constraint functions are convex, the
user equilibrium is unique. For cases where the route set R is very large, it can again be solved
using column generation, using the same approach as outlined in Section 4.3.

6.      Numerical experiments
We now turn to computational experiments conducted on three networks using artificial and real-
life operational data, respectively. The algorithm is implemented in Java, and all experiments are
performed on a personal computer equipped with a 12th Gen Intel Core i7-12700H CPU (2.30
GHz), 64 GB of RAM, 16 cores, and GUROBI 9.5.1.
     When analyzing the solutions to the instances, we aim to answer questions such as:
     (i) How much does incorporating passenger routing help in reducing perceived travel times?
When using GUROBI as a benchmark solution method, how many routes are appropriate to include
in the optimization process?
     (ii) How much do our three variants of the developed cut-and-column generation algorithm
help in improving the solution efficiency in both artificial and real-life networks? What are the
characteristics of the most applicable scenarios for each variant?
     (iii) What are the characteristics of high-quality line plans when minimizing passengers’ perceived
travel times under crowding? What are the benefits of optimizing line plans compared to the
existing ones used in current practical operations?
     (iv) What are the benefits of incorporating crowding effects into line planning to enhance pas-
sengers’ travel experience, particularly in reducing crowding?
     (v) What are the characteristics of deviations between system-optimal and user-equilibrium
routing when minimizing passengers’ perceived travel times under crowding?
     Before analyzing the results of our numerical experiments, we first provide details of the in-
stances used in our study in Section 6.1. In Section 6.2, we address the first question regarding the
effectiveness of including passenger routing and partially discuss the second question on the solu-
tion efficiency of the cut-and-column generation algorithm. Section 6.3 focuses on the remaining
Lu et al.: Line planning under crowding: A cut-and-column generation approach
                                                                                                     15

three questions, exploring the benefits of optimizing line plans, the characteristics of high-quality
solutions, the benefits of incorporating crowding effects, and deviations between system-optimal
and user-equilibrium routing. In Section 6.3, we also demonstrate that our methodologies gener-
ate more effective line plans relative to the existing line plan employed in real-world operations,
leading to smaller passengers’ perceived travel times within the network. Lastly, in Section 6.4, we
demonstrate the scalability of our algorithm on the entire Beijing metro network, providing further
insights into the second question on large-scale problem-solving capability.

6.1.       Experimental design
To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed formulations and algorithms, we present the
results of numerical experiments utilizing artificial instances with the grid network and real-world
case studies based on the Beijing metro network. Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of the
instances.

                                     Table 1      Characteristics of the instances.
  Instance                  Network              Candidate lines (#) OD pairs (#) Demand (#)
     A                 5 × 5-grid network               128                   567       2,547
                     Beijing metro central
       B                                                168                23,374     446,649
               sub-network with 8 existing lines
       C         Beijing metro entire network           534                56,916     776,401



  First, we focus on a 5 × 5-grid network detailed in Friedrich et al. (2017a) and
Schiewe, Jäger, and Schöbel (2024) to analyze the benefits of incorporating passenger routing into
the line planning problem and the effectiveness of our algorithm. As Figure 2 shows, this network
comprises 25 nodes and 40 edges, and serves 2,547 passengers in 567 OD pairs. Travel times on each
edge are 6 minutes and dwell times at stations are 1 minute. We construct a line pool consisting
of 128 lines. The operational costs dℓ for line ℓ is equal to 8Nℓ where Nℓ is the number of edges
traversed by line ℓ. Additionally, the set-up costs eℓ are positively proportional to dℓ , and are given
by eℓ = 1.5 × dℓ . We obtain a baseline budget B by solving the cost-minimal line planning problem
with strict capacities. In the experiments, we vary the actual budget B to 100% and 120% of this
value. The transfer penalty is set at 5 minutes. Based on a large number of pre-experiments with
B set at B, we observe that the maximum frequency of operated lines in optimal solutions consis-
tently remains no greater than 5, regardless of variations in the crowding factor. This observation
supports the conclusion that higher frequency values are unnecessary in this context. Therefore,
in all experiments based on the grid network, the upper bound for frequency (denoted as fℓmax for
all ℓ ∈ L) is set to 5 trains per hour.
                                          Lu et al.: Line planning under crowding: A cut-and-column generation approach
16


                                 1           2           3           4            5

                                 6           7           8           9           10

                                11          12          13          14           15

                                16          17          18          19           20

                                21          22          23          24           25
Figure 2     5 × 5-grid network used in the computational study.


     Thereafter, we perform experiments on the Beijing metro central sub-network to explore the
benefits of the optimized line plans obtained by the algorithm over the line plan used in prac-
tical operations. Lastly, we turn to the entire Beijing metro network to showcase the capa-
bility of the proposed cut-and-column generation algorithm to solve large-scale problems. For
these instances based on the Beijing metro sub-network and entire network, we set the maxi-
mum frequency to 40 trains per hour, as proposed by operational managers of the Beijing metro
(Beijing Municipal Government Press Office 2023).
     The Beijing metro central sub-network includes lines 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, and 13 which cover the
downtown area, as illustrated in Figure 3(a). For this sub-network, we focus on OD pairs where
both the origin and destination lie within it. The Beijing metro sub-network and the entire network
are of particular interest due to the large number of route choices available to commuters and the
high utilization of the booming urban populations. In the Beijing metro network on April 2016,
there are 277 stations (55 of which are transfer stations), and 19 existing lines, as shown in Figure
3(b). To build a line pool of the Beijing metro sub-network and the entire network, we first select
the terminal stations of all the existing lines, and then select a subset of all stations including
all the transfer stations, making sure that there is at least one route between any two of these
terminal stations. After picking the stations use the shortest-path algorithm to find the paths with
the shortest travel time between any two terminal stations, with each shortest path being a line. In
this generating process, we still follow the restriction of established tracks, i.e., we can only set up
lines if tracks already exist. For the line pool within the entire Beijing metro network, we further
remove the dominated lines. The line pools obtained by the above method consists of 168 and 534
lines within the sub-network and the entire network, respectively. The transfer penalty is set as
15 minutes. The operational costs dℓ for line ℓ are equal to Nℓ where Nℓ is the number of stations
traversed by line ℓ. The set-up costs eℓ are again proportional to dℓ , according to a factor that we
vary in the experiments. We calculate the costs of the existing line plan used in real-life operations
and set it as the baseline budget B.
Lu et al.: Line planning under crowding: A cut-and-column generation approach
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               17

                                                                                                                                Line 5 !.,-,,*


                                                                       Line 8 !+,-,,*
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Line 1
                                                                                                                                               Line 13 !++-/0*
                                                                                                              HY                                                                                               Line 2
                                                                                                                                         LSQ                                                                   Line 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Line 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Line 6
                                         Line 4 !.,-,,*                                                                                                                                                        Line 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Line 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Line 13

                                                                                   HDHZ                             BTC                          SYJ

                                               Line 10 !.,-,,*                            ZCL                                            HXXJN

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Transfer stations

                                                                                                                   GLDJ                                                                                           Other stations
                                                                                                                                          DZM                                                                 Line Name !"#$%&$'()*
                                                                                            XZM
                                                                                                        PAL                     NLGX
                                            Line 6 !+,-,,*                                                                                CYM                  HJL
                                                                                            CGZ
                                                                                                                                   DS

                                                                                                               XD
                       Line 1 !.,-,,*
                                                                    GZF             MQD      FXM                                   DD      JGM            GM


                                                                                                       XWM                       CWM

                                                                                          Line 2 !.,-,,*
                                                                                                               CSK




                                                                                                               BJNZ

                                                                                                               JMX

                                                                                                                                         SJZ




                                               (a) Existing line plan in the Beijing metro central sub-network

                                          Line CP !"#$%&




                                                                                                                                   Line 5 !%/#//&
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Line 15 !0$#//&
                                                                                                ZXZ
                                                                        Line 8 !$/#//&

                                                                                                                                                     Line 13 !$$#51&                                                     Line 1       Line 14 East
                                                                                                                   HY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Line 2         Line 15
                                                                                                                                                LSQ
                                                                                                                                                                                            Line Air !2#//&              Line 4       Line 14 West
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Line 5         Line DX
                                                                             XY            XEQ                                                                                                                           Line 6         Line CP
                                         Line 4 !%/#//&                                                                                                                                                                  Line 7         Line FS
                                                                                                                                                                      WJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Line 8         Line YZ
                                                                                                                        ALPK                    DTLD         WJX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Line 9         Line BT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Line 10         Line Air
                                                                                    HDHZ                                  BTC                          SYJ
                                                                                                                                                HXXJN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Line 13
                                                Line 10 !%/#//&                             ZCL

                                                                                                                                                                      SYQ                                                 Transfer stations
                                                                                                                        GLDJ                                                                                              Other stations
                                                                                                                                        YHG      DZM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Line Name !'()*+),-.&
                                                                             GJT                XZM                                            BXQ
                                                                                   BSQ                        PAL                  NLGX
                                           Line 6 !$/#//&                                                                                        CYM                  HJL        JTL
                                                              CSS                               CGZ
                                                                                                                                         DS

                                                                                    JSB                             XD
                     Line 1 !%/#//&
                                                                       GZF              MQD      FXM                                     DD       JGM            GM        DWL         SH    SHD

                                                                                    BJXZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Line BT !$/#//&
                                                                                                          XWM                          CWM

                                                                                                Line 2 !%/&                                                                      JLS
                                                                       LLQ
                                                                                                                    CSK                 CQK


                                                                 QLZ
                                                                                                                                               PHY
                  Line 14 East !0$#//&                                        XJ
                                                                                    Line 14 West !1#/2&
                                                                                                                    BJNZ                                       SLH
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Line 7 !04#//&
                                                                                                                    JMX

                                                                                                                                               SJZ
                                                                                                                    GYXQ



                                                                       GGZ
Line FS !0/#14&
                                                             Line 9 !03#/$&
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Line YZ !3#//&




                                                                                                      Line DX !$/#//&


                                                     (b) Existing line plan in the entire Beijing metro network
Figure 3               Real-life metro networks used in the computational study.
                                                                      Lu et al.: Line planning under crowding: A cut-and-column generation approach
18

     We select a working day to process the passenger demand, using OD data derived from the
historically detected Automated Fare Collection system. On this day, the entire Beijing metro
network accommodated a total of 5,989,805 passengers. During the busiest hour, between 7:00 a.m.
and 8:00 a.m., 776,401 passengers traveled, experiencing severe crowding. The network comprises
56,916 OD pairs. Within the sub-network, there are 23,374 OD pairs and a passenger demand of
446,649. The running time on each section between two adjacent stations in this case study is set
to the real value in real-world operations.
     For the cut-and-column generation methods, we use the following parameters based on prelim-
inary experiments. We use ∆1 = 5 and ∆2 = 10, i.e. if the average number of routes for each OD
pair exceeds 5, we remove columns whose reduced costs exceed 10. In the first iteration of the
column generation process, we terminate the process if the improvement within 20 consecutive
iterations (I = 20) is not higher than 0.01% (ǫ = 0.01%). Subsequently, the values of I and ǫ are
dynamically adjusted: I is decreased by 1, and ǫ is increased by 0.05% in each successive iteration,
with a minimum value of I set to 1.

6.2.     Algorithmic performance
We compare the performance of the proposed three procedures of the cut-and-column generation
algorithm with GUROBI. To do so, we conduct two experiments using instances based on the grid
network. In the first experiment, we use GUROBI to solve Formulation (2) to optimality with
varying numbers of routes for each OD pair, establishing a suitable benchmark for the algorithm.
In the second set, we solve Formulation (2) using three variants of the cut-and-column generation
approach and compare the optimal solutions obtained from GUROBI.

                                                                ·104

                                                          7.2
                            Passengers’ perceived times




                                                           7

                                                          6.8

                                                          6.6

                                                          6.4


                                                                  2      4   6     8   10 12 14                  16
                                                                       Number of routes in the PTN
Figure 4    Comparison of passengers’ perceived travel times among various numbers of routes.
Lu et al.: Line planning under crowding: A cut-and-column generation approach
                                                                                                                    19

  For the first experiment, we set a crowding factor of 0.05 and a budget of B. We systematically
increase the number of PTN routes from two to 15 for this set of experiments, solving all instances
to optimality using GUROBI. The results are presented in Figure ??. We observe that if the number
of routes is small, increasing the number of routes yields substantial reductions in passengers’
perceived travel times. As the number of available routes increases, the marginal benefits taper off.
These findings suggest that incorporating sufficient passengers’ routes into line planning is necessary
to model the routing adequately. Consequently, for subsequent experiments, we use GUROBI to
solve the model with up to 15 PTN routes per OD pair, serving as a benchmark for the algorithm.
  Next, Table 2 and Figure 5 provide a detailed performance comparison of the three variants of
the cut-and-column generation algorithm (FCTP, FPTC, and APAC) against GUROBI. The table
summarizes the objective values of the best feasible solutions produced by each algorithm, along
with their computational times. It also includes the objective value achieved after 240 seconds of
computation, the optimal objective value, and the corresponding computational time for GUROBI.
The figure illustrates the average relative differences in objective values and computational time
between the cut-and-column generation approach and GUROBI. Since we use the optimal solutions
obtained by GUROBI as the benchmark, the relative gaps are true optimality gaps.

 Table 2     Comparison between three variants of the cut-and-column generation algorithm and GUROBI based
                                               on the 5 × 5-grid network.
    Instance                 FCTP                  FPTC                  APAC              GUROBI (15 PTN routes)
Budget Crowding                                                                          Objective Objective Time
                      Objective Time (s)     Objective Time (s)     Objective Time (s)
 (%)      factor                                                                          (240 s)   (final) (final, s)
 100       0.01        52,182           76    52,862      130        52,862      70       52,969    52,147     13,677
 100       0.02        55,295           76    55,902      131        55,902      60       55,520    55,116      9,245
 100       0.03        58,721           83    58,942      150        58,941      60       59,201    57,866      8,873
 100       0.04        61,780           97    61,980      155        61,890      53       62,082    60,445      8,196
 100       0.05        63,790          104    65,012      152        65,012      66       63,904    62,958      2,738
 100       0.06        66,792          111    68,046      186        68,038      69       66,288    65,465      8,601
 100       0.07        69,524          132    71,062      211        71,062      64       70,698    67,965      5,934
 100       0.08        72,381          130    74,084      210        74,082      81       73,566    70,463      4,684
 120       0.01        51,207           68    52,351      133        52,351      85       52,464    51,091      9,190
 120       0.02        53,839           80    54,820      129        54,820      63       54,725    53,399     11,273
 120       0.03        56,472           81    57,289      127        57,289      55       56,813    55,550     12,325
 120       0.04        59,093           93    59,758      137        59,757      55       59,902    57,602     11,474
 120       0.05        60,951           96    62,224      162        62,224      55       60,990    59,641      9,906
 120       0.06        63,214          108    64,688      162        64,688      68       63,077    61,590      9,533
 120       0.07        65,607          116    67,150      200        66,070      69       65,161    63,540     14,120
 120       0.08        66,950          129    69,405      194        68,409      70       67,242    65,495      7,840

    Note: Abbreviation: s = seconds.



  The results show that despite the relatively small size of these instances, GUROBI has a hard
time finding optimal solutions, requiring multiple hours of computation time. The three variants
of the cut-and-column generation approach find high-quality solutions in a matter of minutes, but
with gaps up to about 5%. FCTP achieves the smallest average optimality gap of 1.77%, along with
                                              Lu et al.: Line planning under crowding: A cut-and-column generation approach
20

a narrower median and interquartile range compared to FPTC and APAC. Moreover, in 13 out of 16
instances, FCTP achieves better performance within at most 132 seconds of computation compared
to GUROBI after 240 seconds. Based on these results and considering the strategic planning nature
of our problem, we select FCTP as the solution method for further experimentation.




                                                               Reduction in computational time (% )
                                                                                                      100
            6
                                                                                                      99
            5
                                                                                                      98
            4
 Gap (% )




            3                                                                                         97

            2                                                                                         96

            1
                                                                                                      95
            0
                   FCTP           FPTC            APAC                                                      FCTP          FPTC        APAC
      (a) Gap relative to GUROBI optimal solutions                                                           (b) Computational time
Figure 5           Performance comparison of the three procedures versus GUROBI.



6.3.            Managerial insights
This section evaluates the benefits of integrating crowding effects into the line planning decision and
offers insights into optimized line plans across various crowding factors. The insights are derived
by various experiments on the 5 × 5-grid network and the Beijing metro central sub-network. All
models are solved using the FCTP variant of the cut-column generation algorithm. Our insights
quantify the benefits of incorporating crowding effects into the line planning problem on reducing
the crowding (Insight 1), on decreasing passengers’ perceived travel times (Insight 2), and on the
structure of resulting line plans (Insight 3). In addition, our insights also quantify the benefits of
integrating user-optimal routing in line planning (Insight 4).
     Insight 1. Incorporating crowding effects in line planning reduces crowding, even when the
crowding factor is small.
     We derive this insight through experiments on the Beijing metro central sub-network, focusing
on two aspects. First, we optimize line plans by solving Formulation (2) under varying crowding
factors, considering line set-up costs of 30 and 40 with corresponding budget adjustments, to show
the effectiveness of incorporating crowding effects in reducing crowding. Second, we compare the
optimized line plans with the existing line plan used in real-life operations, highlighting the benefits
of our approach in mitigating crowding compared to the practical benchmark.
Lu et al.: Line planning under crowding: A cut-and-column generation approach
                                                                                                                                                           21

           Figure 6 presents the cumulative distribution of crowding levels under optimized line plans with
various crowding factors and different set-up costs. Regardless of the set-up costs, we can observe
that as the crowding factor increases, the distribution shifts to the left, indicating that crowding
is decreasing. For a crowding factor of 0.001, a significant portion of the arcs has a crowding level
above 80%. For the higher crowding factors, there are virtually no arcs with such high crowding
levels. This suggests that a larger proportion of the network operates at lower crowding levels
under higher crowding factors, improving overall passenger experience. Furthermore, comparing
Figures 6(a) and (b), higher set-up costs not only reduce maximum crowing levels, but also compress
the distribution towards lower crowding levels.


                            1                                                                                  1
 Cumulative distribution




                                                                                    Cumulative distribution
                           0.8                                                                                0.8

                           0.6                                                                                0.6

                           0.4                                                                                0.4

                           0.2                          Crowding factor = 0.001                               0.2                     Crowding factor = 0.001
                                                        Crowding factor = 0.003                                                       Crowding factor = 0.003
                            0                           Crowding factor = 0.015                                0                      Crowding factor = 0.015

                                 0     20   40 60 80 100 120 140 160                                                0   20   40 60 80 100 120 140 160
                                              Crowding level (%)                                                               Crowding level (%)
                                       (a) Construction cost = 30                                                       (b) Construction cost = 40
Figure 6                             Cumulative distribution of crowding levels under the optimized line plans with different crowding factors
                                     for the Beijing metro sub-network.



           Next, Figure 7 compares the existing line plan on the Beijing metros sub-network with optimized
line plans. The relative reductions in average perceived travel time (APTT) is calculated as the
relative differences between the results of the optimized and existing line plans. We observe that
the optimized line plan reduces passengers’ perceived travel time by 4.6% to 7.5%. Additionally, the
results indicate that higher crowding factors correlate with greater reductions in the perceived travel
time. Increasing set-up costs eℓ from 30 to 40 generally leads to further reductions in passengers’
perceived travel time, although the differences become marginal at higher crowding factors. For
instance, at a crowding factor of 0.010, the reductions of APTT are 4.6% (eℓ = 30) and 7.4%
(eℓ = 40), respectively.
           Insight 2. By incorporating crowding effects into line planning, passengers’ perceived travel
time is reduced. However, this comes at the expense of an increase in the travel time.
                                                                                                     Lu et al.: Line planning under crowding: A cut-and-column generation approach
22


                                                                                                      Installation costs eℓ = 30




                                                               Relative reduction in APTT (%)
                                                                                                8
                                                                                                      Installation costs eℓ = 40


                                                                                                7


                                                                                                6


                                                                                                5


                                                                                                4
                                                                                                    0.008    0.010 0.012                                       0.015
                                                                                                              Crowding factor
Figure 7                                   Relative reductions in average perceived travel time (APTT) under optimized line plans with different
                                           crowding factors, compared to the existing real-life line plan, for instances on the Beijing metro sub-
                                           network.


                                      16
     Relative reduction in APTT (%)




                                                                                                                        Relative increase in ATT (%)




                                      14                                                                                                               8
                                      12
                                      10                                                                                                               6

                                      8
                                                                                                                                                       4
                                      6
                                      4
                                                                                                                                                       2
                                      2
                                       0                                                                                                                0
                                      0.008         0.010    0.012                                          0.015                                      0.008   0.010    0.012        0.015
                                                        Crowding factor                                                                                            Crowding factor
                                                       (a) APTT                                                                                                    (b) ATT
Figure 8                                   Relative differences in average perceived travel time (APTT) and average travel time (ATT) across
                                           various crowding factors compared to the benchmark without crowding effects under optimized line
                                           plans.


     This insight is drawn from experiments on the Beijing metro central sub-network, using a bench-
mark that inputs the optimized line plan under crowding effects into Formulation (1) with γa set
to zero. For each benchmark, the perceived travel costs are recalculated by fixing the optimized
line plan under crowding and applying the corresponding crowding factor values to γa . Thus, each
Lu et al.: Line planning under crowding: A cut-and-column generation approach
                                                                                                    23

point in Figure 8 compares the perceived travel costs of passengers with and without crowding
effects under the same line plan.
  Figure 8 presents the reduction in average perceived travel time (APTT) and the increase in
average travel time (ATT). Three key observations emerge from these results. First, incorporating
crowding effects reduces APTT, with reductions ranging from 12.3% to 15.3% under the presented
crowding factor settings. This indicates that accounting for crowding effects in line planning en-
hances resource utilization, minimizing passengers’ perceived travel time. Second, the incorporation
of crowding effects increases ATT, as more passengers make transfers to search for routes with the
smallest perceived travel costs, with increases ranging from 6.8% to 8.9%. Third, as the crowding
factor increases, APTT decreases and ATT increases. However, the reduction in APTT is always
greater than the increase in ATT, highlighting the overall benefit of considering crowding effects
in line planning.
  Insight 3. Incorporating crowding effects results in structurally different line plans with fewer
lines and higher frequencies.
  In Figure 9, we present the optimal line plans for the 5 × 5-grid network corresponding to the
budget set at the baseline budget B, highlighting both the operated lines and their frequencies.
Without considering crowding effects, eleven lines are operated and all lines operate at the minimum
frequency (i.e., 1). However, incorporating crowding penalties tends to reduce the number of lines
while increasing their frequencies. For example, with a crowding factor of 0.01, eleven lines are
operated, of which seven have frequencies greater than 1, and the maximum frequency used is 2.20.
At a crowding factor of 0.20, only eight lines are built, only one of which has a frequency of 1, and
the maximum frequency used increases to 5.
  Furthermore, Figure 10 illustrates the optimized line plans for the Beijing metro sub-network
under different crowding factors, with set-up costs set at 30. We observe that the optimized line
plan contains 9 operated lines with a minimum headway frequency of 11.73 when the crowding
factor is 0.008. As the crowding factor increases to 0.015, the line plan is reduced to 8 lines, with a
minimum headway frequency of 13.55. A similar trend is observed for the optimized line plans with
set-up costs set to 20, shown in Figure 13 in Appendix A. These findings lead us to the conclusion
that incorporating crowding effects in line planning results in fewer lines with higher frequencies.
  Insight 4. The system-optimal routing only deviates slightly from the user-equilibrium.
  Since passengers do not always resort to the recommended route through a network but instead
minimize their perceived travel time, we also compare it to the user equilibrium. To do so, we
first determine an optimized line plan y by solving Formulation (2), with the budget set to B,
and re-evaluate passengers’ perceived travel time using the cut-and-column generation algorithm.
Next, we solve Formulation (4) using the same algorithm, utilizing the established line plan.
                                                                          Lu et al.: Line planning under crowding: A cut-and-column generation approach
24

                     Line 2 (1.00)        Line 33 (1.00)    Line 49 (1.00)                                     Line 2 (1.00)        Line 33 (1.83)       Line 49 (1.00)

     Line 1 (1.00)       0           1            2          3            4       Line 3 (1.00)    Line 1 (1.00)    0          1          2          3            4

                                                                                                   Line 9 (2.20)
     Line 16 (1.00)      5           6            7          8            9       Line 52 (1.00)   Line 14 (1.45)   5          6          7          8            9



     Line 12 (1.00)     10           11           12        13           14                        Line 12 (1.00)   10         11         12         13          14       Line 25 (1.15)
                                                                                   Line X ( X )

                                                                                   Line index
     Line 8 (1.00)      15           16           17        18           19       (Frequency)                       15         16         17         18          19       Line 37 (1.43)
                                                                                                   Line 5 (1.09)

                                                                                              X

     Line 4 (1.00)      20           21           22        23           24       Line 17 (1.00)                    20         21         22         23          24       Line 17 (1.17)


                             (a) Crowding factor = 0                                                                (b) Crowding factor = 0.01

                Line 2 (1.11)              Line 33 (3.12)        Line 49 (1.25)                               Line 2 (1.22)         Line 33 (3.64)       Line 49 (1.19)

     Line 1 (1.39)       0           1            2         3             4                        Line 1 (1.00)    0          1          2          3            4

     Line 9 (3.82)

     Line 14 (1.75)      5           6            7         8             9                        Line 14 (2.13)   5          6          7          8            9



                        10           11          12         13           14       Line 25 (1.76)                    10         11         12         13          14       Line 9 (5.00)



     Line 8 (1.27)      15           16          17         18           19                        Line 8 (1.53)    15         16         17         18          19



                        20           21          22         23           24       Line 17 (1.40)                    20         21         22         23          24       Line 17 (2.16)


                         (c) Crowding factor = 0.10                                                                 (d) Crowding factor = 0.20
Figure 9              Optimized line plans for instances on the grid network with increasing values of the crowding factor.


     In Figure 11, we present the resulting relative differences between the UE and SO objective
values, which are calculated by the optimal objective value of the UE model minus that of the SO
model, and divide that of the SO model. From the results in Figure 11, a few observations stand
out. First, we can observe that the user equilibria closely approximate the system optimum with
respect to varying crowding factors in the instances based on the grid network. For example, the
maximum value of the relative differences between the UE and SO objective values is below 0.07%
among all instances. A second observation is the divergence between UE and SO in the Beijing
sub-network is a little more pronounced, with a maximum of 0.64%. As such, we conclude that
integrating user-optimal routing in line planning offers limited benefits.

6.4.        Real-life case study based on the Beijing metro entire network
We now assess the scalability of our algorithm through experiments on the entire Beijing metro
network by varying the crowding factor from 0 to 0.008. The set-up costs eℓ are set to 40. Based
on the conclusions in Section 6.2, we use the FCTP variant of the cut-and-column generation
algorithm. For the first column generation iteration, ǫ is started at 1% and I at 5. Then, with I
having a minimum value of 1, ǫ is raised by 0.2% and I is decreased by 1 in each iteration.
Lu et al.: Line planning under crowding: A cut-and-column generation approach
                                                                                                                                25

                                                                                                 Line 1
                                                                      Line 5 !,.-,1*             Line 2
                                                                                                 Line 4
                                   Line 8 !+,-.,*
                                                                                                 Line 5
                                                                                                 Line 6
                                       Line 13 !/2-4.*                                           Line 8
                                                                                                Line 10
              Line 4 !,+-+0*                                                                    Line 13
                                                                                                Line 31



                    Line 10 !,,-3/*
                                                           Line 31                               Transfer stations
                                                            !++-0/*                              Other stations
                                                                                                   Line Name
                                                                                                   !"#$%&$'()*
                  Line 6 !/1-2/*


 Line 1 !,.-//*



                                                Line 2 !,+-,.*
                                                                                       N&56$# of built lines: 9
                                                                                       Minimum frequency among all lines: 11.73
                                                                                       Maximum frequency among all lines: 39.56
                                                                                       Maximum frequency among all sections: 46.66



                                                         (a) Crowding factor = 0.008


                                                                                                Line 1
                                                                      Line 5 !/2-1/*            Line 2
                                                                                                Line 4
                                   Line ! !+,-..*
                                                                                                Line 5
                                                                                                Line 6
                                       Line 13 !51-11*                                          Line !
                                                                                                Line 10
              Line 4 !//-11*                                                                    Line 13




                     Line 10 !/,-41*
                                                                                                 Transfer stations
                                                                                                 5    

                                                                                                   Line      
                                                                                                   !"#$%&$'()*
                  Line 6 !,0-34*


 Line 1 !/0-.+*



                                                Line 2 !/0-/,*
                                                                                       7&67$# of built lines: %

                                                                                       Minimum frequency among all lines: 13.55
                                                                                       Maximum frequency among all lines: 40.00
                                                                                       Maximum frequency among all sections: 40.00



                                                         (b) Crowding factor = 0.015
Figure 10         The optimal line plans for the Beijing metro sub-network with set-up costs set at 30.
                                                                               Lu et al.: Line planning under crowding: A cut-and-column generation approach
26

 Relative difference between SO and UE (%)




                                                                                                Relative difference between SO and UE (%)
                                             0.07                                                                                           0.65

                                             0.06
                                                                                                                                            0.60
                                             0.05
                                                                                                                                            0.55
                                             0.04

                                             0.03                                                                                           0.50

                                             0.02
                                                                                                                                            0.45
                                             0.01
                                                                                                                                            0.40
                                               0
                                               0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08                                                        0.008     0.010    0.012             0.015
                                                            Crowding factor                                                                                 Crowding factor
                                                    (a) Grid network (budget B)                                                              (b) Beijing metro sub-network (eℓ = 40)
Figure 11                                           Relative differences between UE and SO among various crowding penalties.


                                             Table 3    Computational times of the algorithm for instances on the entire Beijing metro network.
Crowding factor Computational time (h) Iterations (#) Average RMP time (s) Average PP time (s)
              0                    2.2             53                 10.8               132.5
          0.001                   13.3             57                737.3                98.7
          0.003                   33.7             71              1,597.4               106.0
          0.005                   65.1             76              2,980.7               102.2
          0.008                  108.4             78              4,895.3               107.1
                                      Notes: Computational time includes both network generation and CPU time. Abbreviations: h = hours; s = seconds.


                 Table 3 reports the results, including the total computational time, the number of iterations, the
average time for solving the restricted master problem (RMP), and the average time for solving
the pricing problem (PP). The instance with a crowding factor of 0, representing the line planning
problem without crowding effects, is solved in 2.2 hours using our proposed cut-and-column gen-
eration algorithm. As the crowding factor increases, the computational time for solving the RMP
rises significantly. For example, when the crowding factor increases from 0 to 0.001, the average
computational time per RMP increases from 10.8 to 737.3 seconds. Similarly, when the crowding
factor rises from 0.003 to 0.008, this time increases from 1,597.4 to 4,895.3 seconds. This growth
is attributed to the increased computational challenge of solving the rotated second-order cone
constraints (2c) by iteratively adding cutting planes. In contrast, the average computational time
per PP does not exhibit a linear relationship with the incorporation of crowding effects.
                 Figure 12 shows the cumulative distribution of crowding levels under different crowding factors
for the Beijing metro entire network. We can observe that as the crowding factor increases from
Lu et al.: Line planning under crowding: A cut-and-column generation approach
                                                                                                                                    27


     Cumulative distribution    1

                               0.8

                               0.6

                               0.4
                                                                                                       Crowding factor = 0.001
                               0.2                                                                     Crowding factor = 0.003
                                                                                                       Crowding factor = 0.005
                                0                                                                      Crowding factor = 0.008


                                                                             0
                                                                             0
                                                                             0
                                                                             0
                                                                             0
                                                                             0
                                                                             0
                                                                             0
                                                                             0
                                                                             0
                                                                             0
                                                                             0
                                                                             0
                                                                             0
                                                                             0
                                10
                                       20
                                            30
                                                 40
                                                      50
                                                           60
                                                                70
                                                                     80
                                                                           90
                                 0




                                                                          10
                                                                          11
                                                                          12
                                                                          13
                                                                          14
                                                                          15
                                                                          16
                                                                          17
                                                                          18
                                                                          19
                                                                          20
                                                                          21
                                                                          22
                                                                          23
                                                                          24
                                                                          Crowding level (%)
Figure 12                            Cumulative distribution of crowding levels under the optimized line plans under different crowding
                                     factors for the Beijing metro entire network.


0.001 to 0.003, the cumulative distribution shifts to the left. This observation aligns with Insight
1, which suggests that incorporating crowding effects into line planning reduces crowding. This
reduction enhances passenger comfort and improves the efficiency of the metro system. These
findings highlight the importance of incorporating crowding effects in line planning for large-scale
networks like the Beijing metro. However, for larger crowding factors (0.005 and 0.008), the problem
becomes increasingly complex, and the diving heuristic has a harder time finding good solutions,
resulting in solutions with more crowding. This shows that practitioners should carefully select the
crowding factor.

7.                             Conclusion
This paper addressed a line planning problem under crowding, extending traditional line plan-
ning by explicitly incorporating crowding effects into passengers’ routing decisions. The problem
is formulated as a mixed-integer nonlinear programming model. To obtain its computationally
tractable form, we propose an MI-SOCP reformulation with second-order cone constraints. To solve
the MI-SOCP, we develop a cut-and-column generation methodology. Specifically, a cut genera-
tion procedure is designed to dynamically generate linear cutting planes to address the rotated
second-order cone constraints on-the-fly, while a column generation procedure is implemented to
iteratively identify effective passenger routing. Within this framework, we propose three variants
of the cut-and-column generation approach.
  Extensive computational experiments yield multiple takeaways. First, the cut-and-column gen-
eration algorithm delivers high-quality solutions with an average optimality gap ranging from 1.8%
                                               Lu et al.: Line planning under crowding: A cut-and-column generation approach
28

to 3.5% on the 5 × 5 grid network within reasonable computation times. The proposed methodol-
ogy scales effectively to large-scale, real-world problems involving over 200 stations, 530 candidate
lines, and 56,000 OD pairs, producing optimized line plans that outperform the one currently used
in practical operations. Additionally, our proposed methodology provides strong practical bene-
fits, achieving significant reductions in passengers’ perceived travel times while reducing crowding
within the network. At a time when increasingly crowded public transit systems need high-quality
services, these benefits offer solid support and valuable tools for practitioners to optimize resource
planning effectively.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No.
72288101).

References
Basciftci B, Van Hentenryck P, 2023 Capturing travel mode adoption in designing on-demand multimodal transit systems.
     Transportation Science 57(2):351–375.
Bayram V, Yıldız B, Farham MS, 2023 Hub network design problem with capacity, congestion, and stochastic demand consid-
     erations. Transportation Science 57(5):1276–1295.
Beijing Municipal Government Press Office, 2023 New technology breaks bottlenecks: Frequency on the beijing metro is expected
     to decrease to 1 minute and 30 seconds. URL https://www.peopleapp.com/rmharticle/30002598532, accessed: 2024-07-01.
Bertsimas D, Ng YS, Yan J, 2021 Data-driven transit network design at scale. Operations Research 69(4):1118–1133.
Borndörfer R, Grötschel M, Pfetsch ME, 2007 A column-generation approach to line planning in public transport. Transportation
     Science 41(1):123–132.
Cacchiani V, Qi J, Yang L, 2020 Robust optimization models for integrated train stop planning and timetabling with passenger
     demand uncertainty. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 136:1–29.
Canca D, De-Los-Santos A, Laporte G, Mesa JA, 2019 Integrated railway rapid transit network design and line planning problem
     with maximum profit. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review 127:1–30.
Chai S, Yin J, D’Ariano A, Liu R, Yang L, Tang T, 2024 A branch-and-cut algorithm for scheduling train platoons in urban
     rail networks. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 181:102891.
Daganzo CF, 1997 Fundamentals of Transportation and Traffic Operations (Emerald Publishing).
De Vos MH, Van Lieshout RN, Dollevoet T, 2024 Electric vehicle scheduling in public transit with capacitated charging stations.
     Transportation Science 58(2):279–294.
Franceschetti A, Honhon D, Laporte G, Van Woensel T, 2018 A shortest-path algorithm for the departure time and speed
     optimization problem. Transportation Science 52(4):756–768.
Friedrich M, Hartl M, Schiewe A, Schöbel A, 2017a Angebotsplanung im öffentlichen verkehr-planerische und algorithmische
     lösungen. Heureka’17 9.
Friedrich M, Hartl M, Schiewe A, Schöbel A, 2017b Integrating passengers’ assignment in cost-optimal line planning. 17th
     Workshop on Algorithmic Approaches for Transportation Modelling, Optimization, and Systems (ATMOS 2017), volume 59
     of Open Access Series in Informatics (OASIcs), 5:1–5:16 (Dagstuhl, Germany: Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für
     Informatik).
Gattermann P, Harbering J, Schöbel A, 2017 Line pool generation. Public Transport 9:7–32.
Goerigk M, Schmidt M, 2017 Line planning with user-optimal route choice. European Journal of Operational Research
     259(2):424–436.
Goossens JW, Van Hoesel S, Kroon L, 2004 A branch-and-cut approach for solving railway line-planning problems. Transporta-
     tion Science 38(3):379–393.
Goossens JW, Van Hoesel S, Kroon L, 2006 On solving multi-type railway line planning problems. European Journal of Oper-
     ational Research 168(2):403–424.
Hartleb J, Schmidt M, Huisman D, Friedrich M, 2023 Modeling and solving line planning with mode choice. Transportation
     Science 57(2):336–350.
Jiang Y, Rasmussen TK, Nielsen OA, 2022 Integrated optimization of transit networks with schedule- and frequency-based
     services subject to the bounded stochastic user equilibrium. Transportation Science 56(6):1452–1468.
Kınay OB, Gzara F, Alumur SA, 2023 Charging station location and sizing for electric vehicles under congestion. Transportation
     Science 57(6):1433–1451.
Kowalczyk D, Leus R, 2018 A branch-and-price algorithm for parallel machine scheduling using zdds and generic branching.
     INFORMS Journal on Computing 30(4):768–782.
Lu Y, Yang L, Yang H, Zhou H, Gao Z, 2023 Robust collaborative passenger flow control on a congested metro line: A joint
     optimization with train timetabling. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 168:27–55.
Lu et al.: Line planning under crowding: A cut-and-column generation approach
                                                                                                                                29

Lu Y, Yang L, Yang K, Gao Z, Zhou H, Meng F, Qi J, 2022 A distributionally robust optimization method for passenger flow
    control strategy and train scheduling on an urban rail transit line. Engineering 12:202–220.
Luan X, Corman F, 2022 Passenger-oriented traffic control for rail networks: An optimization model considering crowding
    effects on passenger choices and train operations. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 158:239–272.
Roughgarden T, 2007 Routing games. Nisan N, Roughgarden T, Tardos E, Vazirani VV, eds., Algorithmic game theory, chap-
    ter 18, 459–484 (Cambridge University Press).
Schiewe A, Schiewe P, Schmidt M, 2019 The line planning routing game. European Journal of Operational Research 274(2):560–
    573.
Schiewe P, Jäger S, Schöbel A, 2024 Lintim - integrated optimization in public transportation. https://www.lintim.net/, open
    source.
Schiewe P, Schöbel A, 2020 Periodic timetabling with integrated routing: Toward applicable approaches. Transportation Science
    54(6):1714–1731.
Schmidt M, 2012 Line planning with equilibrium routing. Ph.D. thesis, Institute for Numerical and Applied Mathematics,
    University of Gottingen.
Schmidt M, Schöbel A, 2024 Planning and optimizing transit lines. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.10074.
Schöbel A, 2012 Line planning in public transportation: models and methods. OR Spectrum 34:491–510.
Schöbel A, 2017 An eigenmodel for iterative line planning, timetabling and vehicle scheduling in public transportation. Trans-
    portation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 74:348–365.
Schöbel A, Scholl S, 2005 Line planning with minimal transfers. Proceeding of 5th Workshop on Algorithmic Methods and
    Models for Optimization of Railways (Germany).
United Nations, 2019 Shifting Demographics: A Visual Guide. https://www.un.org/en/un75/shifting-demographics, [Ac-
    cessed March 28, 2023].
Van Lieshout RN, Bouman PC, Huisman D, 2020 Determining and evaluating alternative line plans in out-of-control situations.
    Transportation Science 54(3):740–761.
Wardrop JG, 1952 Some theoretical aspects of road traffic research. Proceedings of the Institute of Civil Engineers Part II(1):325–
    378.
Xia D, Ma J, Sharif Azadeh S, 2024 Integrated timetabling, vehicle scheduling, and dynamic capacity allocation of modular
    autonomous vehicles under demand uncertainty. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.16409 .
Yao Z, Nie L, Fu H, 2024 Railway line planning with passenger routing: Direct-service network representations and a two-phase
    solution approach. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 186:102989.
Yin J, D’Ariano A, Wang Y, Yang L, Tang T, 2021 Timetable coordination in a rail transit network with time-dependent
    passenger demand. European Journal of Operational Research 295(1):183–202.
                                                               Lu et al.: Line planning under crowding: A cut-and-column generation approach
30

Appendix A:                 Optimized line plans for the Beijing metro central sub-network
This section presents the optimized line plans for the Beijing metro central sub-network, with set-up costs
set to 20, as shown in Figure 13.


                                                                               Line 5 !.+,4-*              Line 1
                                                             Line 30 !.3,20*
                                                                                                           Line 2
                                         Line   !+,-+*                                 Line 32 !..,/-*     Line 4
                                                                                                           Line 5
                                                                                                           Line 6
                                           Line 13 !13,35*
                                                                                                           Line
                                                                                                           Line 10
                  Line 4 !.3,43*
                                                                                                           Line 13
                                                                                                           Line 30
                                                                                                           Line 31
                                                                                                           Line 32
                         Line 10 !.0,1+*
                                                                  Line 31                                    Transfer stations
                                                                   !4,1+*                                         

                                                                                                               Line Name
                                                                                                              !"#$%&$'()*
                      Line 6 !10,++*

     Line 1 !.-,/0*




                                                     Line 2 !.1,2-*
                                                                                                    N&67$# of   
                                                                                                    Minimum frequency among all lines: 7.57
                                                                                                    Maximum frequency among all lines: 29.77
                                                                                                    Maximum frequency among all sections: 38.04



                                                               (a) Crowding factor = 0.008

                                                                                                            Line 1
                                                                               Line 5 !/.-/.*               Line 2
                                                                                                            Line 4
                                           Line 8 !+,-.+*
                                                                                                            Line 5
                                                                                                            Line 6
                                             Line 13 !34-44*                                                Line 8
                                                                                                           Line 10
                      Line 4 !/+-01*                                                                       Line 13
                                                                                                           Line 31



                           Line 10 !/,-.2*
                                                                   Line 31                                  Transfer stations
                                                                   !++-23*                                    "#$& '"(")*+'

                                                                                                              Line Name
                                                                                                              !"#$%&$'()*
                        Line 6 !,.-+2*

       Line 1 !/.-,0*




                                                      Line 2 !//-10*
                                                                                                   N&56$# of built lines: 9
                                                                                                   Minimum frequency among all lines: 11.94
                                                                                                   Maximum frequency among all lines: 40.00
                                                                                                   Maximum frequency among all sections: 49.13




                                                               (b) Crowding factor = 0.015
Figure 13       The optimal line plans for the Beijing metro sub-network with set-up costs set at 20.
