            mathematics

Article
Station Layout Optimization and Route Selection of Urban Rail
Transit Planning: A Case Study of Shanghai Pudong
International Airport
Pei Yin and Miaojuan Peng *


                                         Department of Civil Engineering, School of Mechanics and Engineering Science, Shanghai University,
                                         Shanghai 200444, China
                                         * Correspondence: mjpeng@shu.edu.cn


                                         Abstract: In this paper, a cost-oriented optimization model of station spacing is presented to analyze
                                         the influencing factors of station spacing and layout near Shanghai Pudong International Airport.
                                         The Hierarchical Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise (HDBSCAN) algorithm
                                         is used to cluster and analyze the high population density, and optimize the station layout in
                                         the southwest of Pudong International Airport. A spatial analysis of the land use and geological
                                         conditions in Pudong New Area is given. Combining the optimal station spacing, ideal location and
                                         spatial analysis, five routing schemes to Pudong International Airport are proposed. The DBSCAN
                                         and K-means algorithms are used to analyze the “PDIA-SL” dataset. The results show that the
                                         space complexity of the HDBSCAN is O(825), and the silhouette coefficient is 0.6043, which has
                                         obvious advantages over the results of DBSCAN and K-means. This paper combines urban rail
                                         transit planning with the HDBSCAN algorithm to present some suggestions and specific route plans
                                         for local governments to scientifically plan rail transit lines. Meanwhile, the research method of
                                         station layout, which integrates station spacing, ideal location and spatial analysis optimization, is
                                         pioneering and can provide a reference for developing rail transit in metropolises.

                                         Keywords: urban rail transit; station layout optimization; route planning; influencing factors;
Citation: Yin, P.; Peng, M. Station
                                         HDBSCAN; GIS analysis
Layout Optimization and Route
Selection of Urban Rail Transit
                                         MSC: 90B20
Planning: A Case Study of Shanghai
Pudong International Airport.
Mathematics 2023, 11, 1539. https://
doi.org/10.3390/math11061539
                                         1. Introduction
Academic Editors: Ripon
                                              Pudong International Airport is an essential domestic airport and one of the two major
Kumar Chakrabortty, António Lopes
                                         airports in Shanghai. In 2019 (COVID-19 has a great influence on urban functions [1], which
and José R. Fernánde
                                         leads to the decrease after 2019), the passenger throughput of Pudong International Airport
Received: 19 January 2023                reached 76.1534 million passengers, the cargo throughput was 3.6356 million tons, and the
Revised: 15 February 2023                number of take-off and landing flights was 511,846 [2]. With the rapid development of
Accepted: 4 March 2023                   the national economy and aviation technology, the passenger flow growth at the airport
Published: 22 March 2023                 continues to accelerate. The pressure on landside traffic to Pudong International Airport
                                         has increased dramatically, and the contradiction between supply and demand of passen-
                                         ger transportation has become increasingly prominent [3]. Constructing the connection
                                         between the city and the airport is a critical task in urban transportation planning, and it is
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
                                         significant to optimize the station layout near the airport rationally. The optimization can
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
                                         promote the economic and comprehensive development of the city [4].
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
                                              The development of urban rail transit in developed countries abroad started earlier,
conditions of the Creative Commons
                                         and there are many theoretical studies on the urban rail transit network design. Mohaymany
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
                                         and Gholami (2010) proposed a multi-model optimization method to minimize social, travel
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/         and operating cost [5]. Lai (2012) used genetic algorithm (GA) to optimize the station based
4.0/).                                   on geographic information system (GIS) data [6]. Saidi et al. (2016) analyzed the route




Mathematics 2023, 11, 1539. https://doi.org/10.3390/math11061539                                       https://www.mdpi.com/journal/mathematics
Mathematics 2023, 11, 1539                                                                                            2 of 29




                             selection, and origin-destination (OD) demand distribution in an urban rail transit network
                             based on the total travel time cost of passengers and proposed a benefit optimization model
                             for determining the feasibility and optimality of circular lines [7]. Compared with foreign
                             countries, domestic research on station layout optimization started late but developed
                             rapidly. Lv et al. (2013) established a bilevel programming model for station layout based
                             on Alternative-Use Mode and used a simulated annealing algorithm (SAA) for analysis [8].
                             Chai et al. (2019) proposed a neighborhood search algorithm based on SAA for NP-hard
                             problem whose factors increase exponentially with the network size [9]. Xu et al. (2021)
                             proposed a bilevel multi-objective model neighborhood which integrates the situation
                             of land use and regional traffic network and offered a maximum-minimum ant system
                             (MMAS) combined with the Frank-Wolfe algorithm to solve the NP-Hard problem [10].
                                   Currently, the research on clustering methods at home and abroad mainly focuses on
                             optimizing the serial method. Serial clustering algorithms have been widely studied and
                             applied in the field of statistical operations and data analysis, such as K-means (partition
                             clustering algorithm) [11], CURE (a new hierarchical clustering algorithm) [12], STING
                             (grid-based spatial clustering algorithm) [13] and DBSCAN (density-based clustering
                             algorithm) [14]. The DBSCAN algorithm, which considers the distribution of data points,
                             can judge any shape of clusters and effectively overcome the influence of outliers. However,
                             this algorithm is sensitive to parameter changes, and slight changes in parameters will lead
                             to significant differences in clustering results. And it is necessary to judge successively
                             whether each data point is the core. Through the special processing of shared boundary
                             points, the HDBSCAN introduces the idea of hierarchical clustering based on DBSCAN.
                             This not only corrects the poor clustering results caused by the improper selection of the
                             neighborhood radius (eps) in the DBSCAN but also shields the algorithm’s sensitivity to pa-
                             rameters [15]. As a novel improved algorithm based on DBSCAN, the HDBSCAN is rarely
                             used in engineering. Melvin et al. (2018) used the HDBSCAN to group biopolymer residues
                             and grouped the residues based on the spatial proximity of the correlation matrix [16].
                             Ghamarian and Marquis (2019) improved solute clusters for atom probe tomography (APT)
                             using the HDBSCAN [17]. Wang et al. (2021) used the HDBSCAN to adaptively cluster the
                             shape features of ship trajectories, which has a good clustering effect on ship trajectories in
                             complex waters [18]. Liu et al. (2022) fused line features on the radar signature of leg lasers
                             and used the HDBSCAN to cluster target information and obtain the best position [19]. In
                             summary, HDBSCAN has the most accurate and efficient performance of finding target
                             clusters among the current density-based clustering algorithms, and there is currently no
                             application of the HDBSCAN algorithm in rail transit network design.
                                   At the same time, there are some problems in the design and planning of urban rail
                             transit stations in Shanghai [20]. The specific manifestations are as follows:
                             (1)   Preliminary analysis of passenger flow, emphasizing layout form and ignoring op-
                                   erational efficiency, results in narrow station spacing and the passenger flow far
                                   below expectations;
                             (2)   Local governments are affected by the image project when encountering network
                                   planning and administrative intervention, or the adjustment of rail transit planning
                                   due to the change of local leaders is relatively standard;
                             (3)   The increase in government debt is caused by excessive investment.
                                  Taking Pudong International Airport as an example, the dense stations of Metro Line
                             2 lead to a long running time. The average time it takes for passengers to arrive at Pudong
                             International Airport by rail transit is about 1.5 h, while the time it takes for a car is only
                             about 1 h [21]. According to statistics, after the suspension of Metro Line 2 at 10:00 p.m.,
                             8.8% of flights arriving at Pudong International Airport and 6.7% of departures still takes
                             place [22]. The premature suspension of the subway caused poor service connections.
                             Pudong International Airport has only two rail transit lines that can connect to the urban
                             district, namely Metro Line 2 and Maglev Line. The rail transit located in the southwest of
                             the airport is developing slowly. As a result, passengers in Songjiang, Minhang, Fengxian,
                             Jinshan, and Pudong New Area must transfer multiple rail transit lines if they want to
Mathematics 2023, 11, 1539                                                                                              3 of 29




                             take the subway to reach Pudong International Airport, which leads to inconvenience and
                             discomfort of passengers significantly.
                                  This paper analyzes the influencing factors of station layout, including the factors of
                             station spacing and location. By analyzing the relationship between construction invest-
                             ment and income, a cost-oriented optimization model of station spacing is established,
                             and the working principle of the HDBSCAN is introduced. Taking Pudong International
                             Airport as an example, this paper selects large residential, office and industrial buildings
                             with high population density in the southwest of the airport as the dataset. And this paper
                             uses the HDBSCAN to analyze the dataset to obtain the best clusters. Finally, the ideal
                             point for station selection is established by finding the geometric centroid in the cluster.
                             At the same time, based on the same dataset and hardware conditions, this paper uses
                             DBSCAN and K-means to analyze this case. The results show that the HDBSCAN has
                             obvious advantages in terms of space complexity, silhouette coefficient and clustering effect.
                             In addition, this paper combines the ideal locations, the geospatial conditions and the
                             optimal station spacing. Finally, it compiles the ideal stations into five schemes of the rail
                             transit route selection. The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
                             (1)   This paper combines urban rail transit planning and HDBSCAN algorithm to present
                                   some suggestions and specific route schemes for the local government to scientifically
                                   plan rail transit lines.
                             (2)   This paper comprehensively considers the construction cost, operating cost, social
                                   benefits, land development value-added along the Metro line and travel time cost of
                                   passengers, and proposes a more complete optimization model of station spacing.
                             (3)   The method for studying the station layout, which integrates station spacing, ideal
                                   location and spatial analysis optimization, is pioneering and can provide a reference
                                   for developing rail transit in metropolises.
                             (4)   This paper selects data points in high-population areas for analysis, and the layout
                                   planning of rail transit stations based on this dataset can relieve the traffic pressure of
                                   community residents and guarantee all-age-friendly travel in the community.

                             2. Analysis of Influencing Factors on Layout Optimization of Rail Transit Stations
                             2.1. Influencing Factors of Station Spacing
                                  The station spacing will directly affect the passenger flow distribution of urban rail
                             transit, and it will also change the passengers’ travel decisions. When the station spacing
                             is small, the number of passengers traveling in the unit interval is relatively large; then
                             the passenger flow will decrease with the gradual increase of the station spacing, and the
                             number of passengers will stop changing at a critical point; after passing the critical point,
                             the passenger flow of the unit interval ascends with the increase of the station spacing, but
                             the upward trend is relatively moderate [23]. The change trend of passenger flow with the
                             increase of travel distance is approximately subject to Poisson distribution, and the formula
                             of passenger flow with travel distance is

                                      y = 0.0004x6 − 0.017x5 − 1.2944x4 + 100.4x3 − 2326.7x2 + 18585x + 3896               (1)

                             where y is the predicted full-day passenger flow of a certain travel distance, x is the travel
                             distance of passengers by rail transit (km) [24].
                                   The station spacing will also affect the number of stations, which will greatly affect
                             the construction and operating cost. When the distance between stations is small, the
                             number of stations will increase correspondingly, and the construction and operating cost
                             will increase. Although the setting of large station spacing saves investment, it increases
                             the walking time of passengers. Compared with other urban transportations, rail transit
                             will reduce its attraction to passenger flow to a large extent. This will also cause part of the
                             passenger flow to transfer to adjacent stations, increasing the transport load of adjacent
                             stations [25]. In this paper, more consideration is given to the influence of station spacing
                             on construction cost, which is the number of stations determined by station spacing and the
Mathematics 2023, 11, 1539                                                                                             4 of 29




                             cost of a single station. The formula of average daily construction cost within the service
                             period is                                     h         i
                                                                                    L
                                                                       Ccon · int   d   +1
                                                              Zcon =                                                     (2)
                                                                             365 · n
                             where Zcon is the daily average construction cost of all rail transit stations (CNY), Ccon is
                             the average construction cost of a single station (CNY), d is the distance between rail transit
                             stations (km), L is the total length of rail transit lines (km), n is the number of years of
                             service period (year) [26].
                                  Each station has a certain number of staff and various supporting facilities, and the
                             local government will inevitably pay these personnel and equipment with salary and
                             financial allocation. The reduction of the number of stations will lead to the diminishment
                             of relevant personnel and facilities, and the resource consumption will also decreased,
                             thereby reducing operating costs. Therefore, the operating cost of urban rail transit can be
                             summarized into three aspects:
                             (1)   The salaries of operating personnel;
                             (2)   The cost of equipment update and maintenance;
                             (3)   The cost of daily purchase of power and other resources.
                                   The operating cost of a rail transit station can be defined as
                                                            (                  h         i
                                                                Zope = Cope · int Ld + 1
                                                                                                                          (3)
                                                               Cope = C1 + C2 + C3

                             where Zope is the average daily operating cost of all rail transit stations (CNY), Cope is
                             the average daily operating cost of a single station (CNY), C1 is the sum of the average
                             daily wages of all employees at a single station (CNY), C2 is the average daily resource
                             consumption cost of a single station (CNY), C3 is the average daily equipment update and
                             maintenance cost for a single station (CNY) [27].
                                  Factors such as population density, building density and commercial areas have an
                             important impact on passenger flow. They are directly related to the gathering intensity
                             and distribution state of passenger distributing center, and also indirectly affect land
                             development intensity and use patterns. The construction investment of the station is
                             generally used to purchase resources such as construction materials, labor force, facilities
                             and equipment, which drives the economic benefits of secondary industries. Meanwhile,
                             the production sector will use the funds to purchase the sources and services, which will
                             further drive the economic growth of more industries. And the social and economic growth
                             will be a certain multiple of the initial investment as a result. The formula of social benefits
                             generated by station investment is

                                                                     Zsoc = η · Zcon                                      (4)

                             where Zsoc is the social benefit generated by construction investment (CNY), η is the growth
                             multiple [28].
                                  The operation of urban rail transit will drive the growth of public and economic
                             activities along the Metro line, thereby driving land development, which will greatly
                             increase the added value of land. The formula of average daily social benefit is
                                                                                            h       i
                                                          i =1,2,3 ( ci · β i · θi ) · πr2 · int L + 1 · 104
                                                                                    j              d
                                                  Zland = ∑                                                            (5)
                                                           j=year
                                                                                        365  · n 1


                             where Zland is the average daily social benefit (CNY) generated by land appreciation
                             along the line; c1 , c2 and c3 are the average value-added of residential, commercial and
                             industrial properties (Ten thousand CNY), respectively; β 1 , β 2 and β 3 are the proportion of
                             residential, commercial and industrial properties, respectively; θ1 , θ2 and θ3 are the plot
                                                                                                                       1      2            3

                             proportion of residential, commercial and industrial properties, respectively; θ1 ,
                             θ3 are the plot ratio of residential, commercial and industrial properties within t
                             tive range of stations, respectively; j is the selected data year, r is the attract
Mathematics 2023, 11, 1539                                                                          5 of 29
                             of stations (m), and n1 is the calculated period (year) [29].

                             2.2. Influencing
                               ratio            Factors
                                     of residential,     of Station
                                                     commercial     Selection properties within the attractive range of
                                                                and industrial
                               stations, respectively; j is the selected data year, r is the attractive range of stations (m), and
                                     the calculatedcities’
                               n1 isDescribing      period scale     mainly includes population, economy and land us
                                                              (year) [29].
                             The urban population determines the travel volume of passengers, and the lan
                                2.2. Influencing Factors of Station Selection
                             fects   the distribution of residents’ travel demand, and the scale of urban rail tra
                             stationDescribing     cities’ scale mainly includes population, economy and land use [30,31].
                                        layout [32].      Due to the high cost of urban rail transit, the smooth constr
                                The urban population determines the travel volume of passengers, and the land use affects
                             stations     is limited
                                the distribution        by the travel
                                                   of residents’ urban     economy
                                                                        demand,          and
                                                                                    and the    scale
                                                                                            scale     [33].rail
                                                                                                  of urban  Totransit
                                                                                                                 ensure   andthe   operation
                                                                                                                               station
                                necessary
                             is layout          to attract
                                        [32]. Due            thecost
                                                   to the high    surrounding        passenger
                                                                     of urban rail transit,        flowconstruction
                                                                                            the smooth   to the greatest         extent
                                                                                                                         of stations is to en
                                limited  by  the urban  economy   and  scale [33]. To ensure the operation
                             ficient passenger volume, thereby promoting the healthy development. The dis  effect, it is necessary   to
                                attract the surrounding passenger flow to the greatest extent to ensure sufficient passenger
                                 point of
                             ofvolume,        interest (POI) in Shanghai considered in this paper is shown in Figur
                                           thereby promoting the healthy development. The distribution of point of interest
                               (POI) in Shanghai considered in this paper is shown in Figure 1.




                               Figure 1. Distribution of POI in Shanghai considered in this paper.
                             Figure 1. Distribution of POI in Shanghai considered in this paper.
                                     The shape of cities greatly affects the layout of rail transit stations [34]. For plain
                               cities like Shanghai, the main consideration is to connect major economic points, passenger
                                    The shape
                               distributing        of and
                                              center,  cities                hubs the
                                                               greatly affects
                                                            comprehensive                layout
                                                                                    to form       of network,
                                                                                             a basic rail transit   then refine[34].
                                                                                                              and stations       the For pl
                             like
                               planShanghai,      the main
                                     of station layout.   At theconsideration
                                                                  same time, variousis to  connect
                                                                                       shapes        major
                                                                                               and land      economic
                                                                                                        use patterns        points,
                                                                                                                       also have   an passe
                               impact    on passenger    travel  time  and distance.   Megacities  such as
                             tributing center, and comprehensive hubs to form a basic network, and then r   Beijing  and  Shanghai
                               have always adhered to the layout pattern of decentralized group [35]. Decentralization
                             plan   of station layout. At the same time, various shapes and land use patterns a
                               should be able to use the connections established between Metro lines to reduce the time
                                 impactfor
                             anrequired         passenger
                                            ontravel  betweentravel
                                                                 groups;time    and distance.
                                                                          the group   development  Megacities
                                                                                                     must considersuchtheas  Beijing and
                                                                                                                          balanced
                             have   always
                               layout           adhered
                                        of the central  urban     the suburban
                                                             to and    layout pattern          decentralized
                                                                                 lines [36].ofThe land use patternsgroup    [35]. Decentr
                                                                                                                       in Shanghai
                               mainly    include  cultivated   land, residential,  commercial   and
                             should be able to use the connections established between Metro lines   industrial  land,  and a  small
                                                                                                                                  to reduce
                               amount of grassland, forest land and wetland [37,38]. Compared with industrial land,
                               if there isfor
                             required          travel between
                                           no industrial              groups;
                                                            park in the  area, thethe   group
                                                                                    district    development
                                                                                             government             must consider
                                                                                                          is more inclined    to sell   the
                               residential or commercial land [39,40]. The distribution of land use patterns in Pudong
                               New District is shown in Figure 2.
  mainly include cultivated land, residential, commercial and industrial land, and a small
  amount of grassland, forest land and wetland [37,38]. Compared with industrial land, if
  there is no industrial park in the area, the district government is more inclined to sell res-
  idential
Mathematics       11, commercial
            2023,or   1539       land [39,40]. The distribution of land use patterns in Pudong New
                                                                                                6 of 29

  District is shown in Figure 2.




                          Figure 2. Distribution of land use types in Pudong New Area.
  Figure 2. Distribution of land use types in Pudong New Area.
                              The passenger flow of each rail transit entrance and exit is different, and the passenger
                         flow
       The passenger flow of   ofdifferent
                                   each railsections   on the
                                                 transit        same lineand
                                                            entrance         is disparate
                                                                                   exit is[41].   Regarding
                                                                                             different,     andtravel
                                                                                                                    thetime,   it may
                                                                                                                          passen-
                         appear that the peak time for passenger transport is not the same, and the passenger flow
                          sections
  ger flow of different entering       on the same line is disparate [41]. Regarding travel time, it
                                   the station is not equal to the leaving. In addition, a major task in subway line
                         design time
  may appear that the peak               for passenger
                                 is to determine               transport
                                                    the vertical  alignment,iswhichnot the     same,
                                                                                          greatly       and
                                                                                                  impacts       the passenger
                                                                                                            energy    consumption
                         and construction
  flow entering the station     is not equal  investment.      The entireIn
                                                   to the leaving.            Metro    line is divided
                                                                                 addition,      a major  into   multiple
                                                                                                             task           lines by
                                                                                                                     in subway
                         the stations, and the stations form nodes along the line. The design criteria such as
  line design is to determine     the vertical alignment, which greatly impacts energy consump-
                         the the vertical alignment’s maximum and minimum slope length are different due to
                           investment.
  tion and constructionfunctional             The entire
                                      requirements.             Metro
                                                       Generally,          line isalignment
                                                                    the vertical      dividedof into      multiple
                                                                                                   a station  should be  lines
                                                                                                                           as flatbyas
  the stations, and the stations form nodes along the line. The design criteria such as the the
                         possible  to  ensure  the  safe parking     of  trains.  Due   to the complexity     of  the surrounding
                         environment along the Metro lines, the vertical alignment design of the subway must
  vertical alignment’s maximum            and minimum slope length are different due to functional
                         deal with various constraints. Stations with high land use degree in the surrounding
  requirements. Generally,            vertical
                                theclosely
                         areas are                alignment
                                            related  to large-scaleofresidential
                                                                        a stationand  should
                                                                                          business    as flatand
                                                                                                  bedistricts,   as possible
                                                                                                                     the stationsto at
  ensure the safe parkingtheseof  trains.can
                               locations    Due     to the
                                                attract      complexity
                                                        passengers                of the geological
                                                                        [42]. Regarding     surrounding factors,environment
                                                                                                                   mountain areas
                           therelatively
  along the Metro lines,have     verticallarge    topographical undulations, high altitudes, and diverse geomorphic
                                            alignment        design of the subway must deal with various
                         features. In the planning and design of urban roads, due to frequent encounters with
  constraints. Stations with    highhills,
                         mountains,     landrivers,   buildingsin
                                               use degree         andthe    surrounding
                                                                         poor                   areas are
                                                                               geological conditions,    it is closely
                                                                                                               necessaryrelated
                                                                                                                            to avoid
  to large-scale residential and business districts, and the stations at these locations can
                         large-scale   unfavorable    geological    bodies    and   group   architectures,   resulting   in        at-
                                                                                                                             turning
                         corners in the road. In the meantime, wetland protection areas should also be avoided. The
  tract passengers [42]. Regarding geological factors, mountain areas have relatively large
                         Wetlands Conservation Law of the People’s Republic of China requires strict control of
  topographical undulations,        high altitudes,
                         the development     and occupation         wetlands geomorphic
                                                           andofdiverse          [43]. Wetlands infeatures.        In the
                                                                                                     nature reserves     are plan-
                                                                                                                              strictly
  ning and design of urban       roads,
                         prohibited    fromdue    to frequent
                                             reclaimed,    occupied  encounters
                                                                        or changed at   with
                                                                                           will.mountains,         hills, rivers,
                                                                                                 During the planning         process
                         of rail transit stations, cultivated land and groundwater sources should be avoided as
  buildings and poor geological          conditions, it is necessary to avoid large-scale unfavorable
                         much as possible to avoid pollution and damage to domestic water. For the districts with
  geological bodies andpoor group     architectures,
                               geological   conditions, theresulting        in turning
                                                                station layout               cornersrouting
                                                                                   and appropriate      in thedirection
                                                                                                                   road. In       the
                                                                                                                              should
                         be selected toareas
  meantime, wetland protection                   should
                                          minimize           alsoon
                                                      the impact     bethe avoided.      The Wetlands
                                                                             natural environment.      The 12.5 Conservation
                                                                                                                    m DEM data is
                         collected by ALOS’ PALSAR sensor, and the horizontal and vertical accuracy of the data
  Law of the People’s Republic of China requires strict control of the development and oc-
                         can reach 12 m. The digital elevation model (DEM) map of the 12.5 m elevation of Pudong
  cupation of wetlandsNew   [43].
                               Area   is shown in in
                                   Wetlands             nature
                                                    Figure  3.      reserves are strictly prohibited from re-
  claimed, occupied or changed at will. During the planning process of rail transit stations,
  cultivated land and groundwater sources should be avoided as much as possible to avoid
  pollution and damage to domestic water. For the districts with poor geological conditions,
  the station layout and appropriate routing direction should be selected to minimize the
  impact on the natural environment. The 12.5-m DEM data is collected by ALOS’ PALSAR
  sensor, and the horizontal and vertical accuracy of the data can reach 12 m. The digital
FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                                 7 of 33
      Mathematics 2023, 11, 1539                                                                                                7 of 29




            Figure 3. DEM map of the 3.12.5-m
                              Figure          elevation
                                        DEM map            in Pudong
                                                 of the 12.5-m            New
                                                               elevation in     Area.
                                                                            Pudong New Area.

                                     3. Analysis of Influencing Factors on Layout Optimization of Rail Transit Stations
            3. Analysis of Influencing               on Layout
                                          Factors Model
                               3.1. The Optimization     of StationOptimization
                                                                   Spacing      of Rail Transit Stations
                                   The passenger
            3.1. The Optimization Model               of a station is directly related to the passenger ticket revenue. After
                                                 flowSpacing
                                         of Station
                                     the station is completed and put into use, the main source of its operating income is the
                                   flow ofticket
                  The passengerpassenger            revenue.is
                                                a station        directly
                                                                   Shanghairelated
                                                               The            rail transito    the passenger
                                                                                            system                  ticket
                                                                                                    adopts the metered      revenue.
                                                                                                                         fare system:
                                 within   0–6  km, the toll is 3 CNY;   between   6–16  km,   the toll
            After the station is completed and put into use, the main source of its operating income   is 4 CNY;  between  16–26  km,is
                                 the toll is 5 CNY; between 26–36 km, the toll is 6 CNY; between 36–46 km, the toll is 7 CNY;
            the passenger ticket    revenue.
                                 between    −56 km,The    fee is 8 CNY.rail
                                                      theShanghai             transitprocess
                                                                          The pricing     system can beadopts    thetometered
                                                                                                          simplified               fare
                                                                                                                       the following
                                  km, thei.e.,
            system: within 0–6 formula,       toll is 3 CNY; between         6–16 km, the toll is 4 CNY; between 16–
            26 km, the toll is 5 CNY; between 26–36 km, the                               x ≤ 6)between 36–46 km, the toll
                                                                             toll3 is(06 <CNY;
                                                                            
                                                                              4    ( 6 <  x ≤ 16)
            is 7 CNY; between −56 km, the fee is 8 CNY. The                  pricing process can be simplified to the
                                                                            
                                                                            
                                                                               5 (16 < x ≤ 26)
                                                                    f (x) =                                                        (6)
            following formula, i.e.,                                        
                                                                              6 (26 < x ≤ 36)
                                                                                 7 (36 < x ≤ 46)
                                                                              
                                                                               
                                                                                          (             )
                                                                               
                                                             3                            ≤ ≤566)
                                                                                       <<x x
                                                                                 8 (46 0
                                                                               

                                                             
                                                                                                   ≤ 16 )
                                                                                         ( 6 <ofx rail
                                     where f ( x ) is a simplified function of the urban rail transit fare (CNY).
                                          Based on Equations 4 (1) and (6), the formula               transit fare revenue for a whole
                                                             
                                     day is
                                                             5                         (16 < x ≤ 26 )
                                                  f ( xZ) 6=                                                                         (6)
                                                               6                        ( 26  <  x ≤   36 )
                                                                    Z 16         Z 26         Z 36           Z 46         Z 56
                                            Ztic = 3         
                                                            ydx + 4      ydx + 5      ydx + 6       ydx + 7       ydx + 8      ydx  (7)
                                                         d 
                                                                                                 x ≤ 46 )
                                                                                        ( 36 < (km).
                                                                     6            16            26             36          46
                                                               7
                                     where d is the distance  between rail transit stations
                                                             8time can be converted into
                                                                                        ( 46time
                                                                                             < x cost,
                                                                                                   ≤ 56and) then calculated in parallel
                                          Passenger travel   
                               with other economic values. Among all passengers, travel for work and study can account
            where f ( x) is a simplified
                               for half of the entire travel population, and this half of the travel population spends one-
                                             function of the urban rail transit fare (CNY).
                               tenth of their disposable time creating value for work and study [44]. Therefore, the formula
                Based on Equations       (1) and
                               for converting              timeformula
                                                     (6), the
                                                the travel                  of rail
                                                                of all passengers in transit  fareconomic
                                                                                     one day into   revenue    for ais whole
                                                                                                           benefits
            day is                                                                                   Z L
                                                                               0.5 · 0.3 · t · G
                                                                     Ztime =                     ·         ydx                     (8)
                                                                                     3600
                                                           6 ydx + 5 16 ydx + 6  26 ydx + 7  36 ydx + 8  46 ydx
                                   Z tic = 3  6d ydx + 4 16         26              36      d 46           56
                                                                                                                                     (7)

            where d is the distance between rail transit stations (km).
                Passenger travel time can be converted into time cost, and then calculated in parallel
            with other economic values. Among all passengers, travel for work and study can account
Mathematics 2023, 11, 1539                                                                                               8 of 29




                             where G is the value created per hour (CNY) [45].
                                  Based on the analysis of the impact of station spacing and metered fares in Shanghai, a
                             cost-oriented optimization model of station spacing is established, and the above indicators
                             are classified into income (Zinc ) and cost (Zcost ). The formula of maximum optimization
                             model is                       
                                                                  maxZ = Zinc − Zcost
                                                                 Zinc = Zsco + Zland + Ztic                           (9)
                                                                 Zcost = Z con + Z ope + Z time
                                                            

                             where Z is the total benefit of rail transit (CNY).

                             3.2. HDBSCAN Algorithm
                                   Density-based clustering methods have been widely used in big data analysis of
                             geographic feature information. Based on the DBSCAN, the HDBSCAN algorithm extends
                             DBSCAN by converting it into the hierarchical clustering method, using stability-based
                             techniques to extract planar clusters. HDBSCAN introduces parameters minpts(mpts) and
                             minclustersize (mclsize): the former represents the number of points from the random point
                             to its nearest neighbor, and the latter represents the minimum size of the cluster, which
                             implicitly affect the distribution of clusters detected in the cluster hierarchy.
                                   In order to estimate the density more conveniently, HDBSCAN defines the distance
                             measure between each point, and transforms the density space into a distance space that
                             can be directly recognized. The HDBSCAN algorithm adopts the relevant definition of
                             mutual reachability distance, where corek ( x ) is defined as the distance from point to the
                             nearest neighbor. The formula of mutual reachability distance is

                                                   dmreach−k ( a, b) = max{corek ( a), corek (b), d( a, b)}               (10)

                             where d( a, b) is the initial distance metric between point a and b. The size of the circle radius
                             depends on the choice of k, and a larger value will classify more points in high-density
                             clusters. Under the dmreach−k ( a, b), the distance between the dense points (points with
                             low core distance) remain unchanged. Still, the outliers will be pushed away under the
                             influence of this parameter, which effectively reduces the outliers while maintaining the
                             clustering effect of high-density [46].
                                   HDBSCAN calculates the Euclidean minimum spanning tree (MST) in the dataset
                             X, namely the proximity graph with the Euclidean distance between points as the edge
                             weight (eps). Then, the Prim algorithm is used to help construct the MST. Every time one
                             edge of the tree is constructed, another vertex of the adjacent edge with the smallest weight
                             is constantly searched. Stop until the tree contains all vertices and achieve the minimum
                             sum of all edge weights. Meanwhile, gradually remove edges whose weights greater than
                             a falling threshold from the proximity graph, and then check the remaining connected
                             components in the graph. The HDBSCAN algorithm takes the shortest distance between
                             clusters as the measure, while sorting the edges of the tree in the order of increasing
                             distance, and then iterates through the threshold until a new merged cluster is created for
                             each edge [47]. Figure 4 shows the entire process from the calculating the MST by the Prim
                             algorithm to construct the cluster hierarchy.
                                   The cluster hierarchy is difficult to explain the specific clustering situation, and has
                             many outliers that need post-processing. At the same time, any choice of cut-line location
                             for the cluster hierarchy is also a choice for mutual reachability distance, hence a single and
                             fixed density level. In this case, if we want to deal with clustering at variable density levels
                             and obtain the flattened clusters, we need to extract a compressed tree of core clusters
                             from the cluster hierarchy. To concretize this concept, the HDBSCAN introduces the new
                             parameter mclsize. Once the minimum cluster size is available, the split action will ask
                             if the number of new clusters is less than mclsize. The points that were split out can be
                             declared as the breakaway points, letting the larger cluster retain its identity of parent
                             cluster, and marking which points broke away from the initial cluster and the distance
 Mathematics 2023, 11, 1539                                                                                                                             9 of 29




                                   when they left. On the other hand, if split into two clusters, each cluster size must remain
                                    equal to mclsize, and let the split remain in the tree. After traversing the entire hierarchy, we
Mathematics 2023, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW
                                    end up with a compressed tree with small nodes, and each node will contain information    9 of 33
                                    about how the size of the cluster changes as the distance shrinks.


                                             Input
                                                                                                   Treat each point in MST as a cluster

                    Pick a point in the dataset defined as the initial point

                                                                                             Calculate the shortest distance between clusters
                              Set the already visited points to u,
                                   the unvisited points to v
                                                                                           Merge the clusters with the shortest distances into a
                      Define the distance from u to v as edge weights,                                         new cluster
                          and use an array to record these values

                                                                                            The number of points in each cluster should not be
                        Find the edge with the smallest weight from                                   less than the value of mtps
                                         the array
                                                                                     NO


                        Merge the vertices of this edge into the array                                       whether new
               No                                                                                    merged clusters are created for
                                                                                                              each edge

                                     Number of edges=
                                     number of points-1
                                                                                                                   Yes

                                             Yes
                                                                                                                 Output
                              Generate minimum spanning tree

                                              (a)                                                                 (b)

                                          Figure4.4.MST:
                                         Figure      MST:(a)
                                                          (a)Prim
                                                              Primalgorithm;
                                                                   algorithm;(b)  Hierarchicalclustering.
                                                                              (b)Hierarchical  clustering.

                                              The Collection
                                          4. Data cluster hierarchy is difficult to explain the specific clustering situation, and has
                                         many This     paper
                                                 outliers  thatuses
                                                                 need Python                    At thethe
                                                                                 Spider to obtain
                                                                        post-processing.                samedata    information
                                                                                                                time,    any choice   825
                                                                                                                                    ofof    large-scale
                                                                                                                                          cut-line         resi-
                                                                                                                                                    location
                                           dential, commercial,      and   office  buildings    on  the “Anjuke”       website   and
                                         for the cluster hierarchy is also a choice for mutual reachability distance, hence a single  obtains    the geodetic
                                           coordinates
                                         and              of the
                                               fixed density       WGS-84
                                                                level.  In thissystem        Google
                                                                                  case, ifinwe         to dealaccording
                                                                                                 want Earth                           at variablename.
                                                                                                                              to the buildings’
                                                                                                                  with clustering                    densityIn
                                           order  to  establish   a one-to-one      correspondence        between      the  geographic
                                         levels and obtain the flattened clusters, we need to extract a compressed tree of core clus-      coordinates     and
                                                planethe
                                           the from
                                         ters          rectangular    coordinates
                                                          cluster hierarchy.       To of   the data this
                                                                                       concretize    point,   this paper
                                                                                                           concept,          transforms the
                                                                                                                        the HDBSCAN             WGS-84 the
                                                                                                                                            introduces     geo-
                                           graphic
                                         new         coordinate
                                                parameter           into. the
                                                              mclsize     Once WGS_1984_UTM_Zone_51N
                                                                                  the minimum cluster size iscoordinate              projection.
                                                                                                                         available, the              Thewill
                                                                                                                                           split action   data
                                           locations
                                         ask           are distributed
                                              if the number                in 11 towns
                                                                of new clusters       is less  than the
                                                                                             under        Pudong
                                                                                                      mclsize    . TheNew     District,
                                                                                                                         points         including
                                                                                                                                 that were            Datuan,
                                                                                                                                              split out   can
                                           Hangtou,    Huinan,     Laogang,     Nanhui      New   Town,    Nicheng,      Shuyuan,    Wanxiang,
                                         be declared as the breakaway points, letting the larger cluster retain its identity of parent             Xinchang,
                                           Xuanqiao
                                         cluster,  andand    Zhuqiao.
                                                         marking               name the
                                                                          We points
                                                                      which                  dataset
                                                                                         broke   away “PDIA-SL”,        and “PDIA-SL”
                                                                                                         from the initial      cluster and  collects  data on
                                                                                                                                               the distance
                                           residential,  factory   and   office  buildings     in these  townships       in mid,  mid-high
                                         when they left. On the other hand, if split into two clusters, each cluster size must remain          and   high  rise
                                           buildings    [48]. Among       them,    buildings     with  4
                                         equal to mclsize , and let the split remain in the tree. After traversing the entire hierarchy,9
                                                                                                         to   6 floors    are defined   as  mid-rise,   7  to
                                         we   endare
                                           floors       with a as
                                                   updefined         mid-high rise,
                                                                 compressed              with10small
                                                                                   tree and       or more    floors
                                                                                                        nodes,     andareeach   nodeaswill
                                                                                                                           defined      high-rise.
                                                                                                                                             contain Mid-rise,
                                                                                                                                                       infor-
                                           mid-high    rise and   high-rise    buildings     bring  obvious     social
                                         mation about how the size of the cluster changes as the distance shrinks.       and  economic     benefits,  and the
                                           most important feature is concentrating the urban population. This enables the formation
                                              high-density
                                         4.ofData  Collectionareas, thereby reducing the area of construction land in megacities and
                                           megalopolis where land resources are tight.
                                                This paper uses Python Spider to obtain the data information of 825 large-scale resi-
                                                 Residential buildings refer to residential areas of various scales formed by citizens
                                         dential,  commercial,
                                           living together,          and office
                                                              surrounded        by buildings     on the
                                                                                    district-level   roads“Anjuke”
                                                                                                              or natural website    and obtains
                                                                                                                            boundaries.             the geo-
                                                                                                                                             Generally,   they
                                         detic  coordinates    of  the WGS-84       system    in Google    Earth    according    to
                                           correspond to a residential population of 7000–15,000 and households of 2000–4000. Based the  buildings’    name.
                                         Inonorder            and aanalysis
                                                     to establish
                                               the research            one-to-one       correspondence
                                                                                  of urban     passenger flow between      the geographic
                                                                                                                     and land                   coordinates
                                                                                                                                 use, rail transit    stations
                                         and   the plane   rectangular      coordinates      of the  data   point,   this  paper
                                           cover the social and economic centers, and these areas usually adopt high-intensity     transforms     the WGS-  de-
                                         84 geographic coordinate into the WGS_1984_UTM_Zone_51N coordinate projection. The
                                         data locations are distributed in 11 towns under the Pudong New District, including Da-
                                         tuan, Hangtou, Huinan, Laogang, Nanhui New Town, Nicheng, Shuyuan, Wanxiang,
                                         Xinchang, Xuanqiao and Zhuqiao. We name the dataset “PDIA-SL”, and “PDIA-SL” col-
                                         lects data on residential, factory and office buildings in these townships in mid, mid-high
       Mathematics 2023, 11, 1539                                                                                                          10 of 29




                                               velopment. The dependence between urban travel and land use is the superposition of
                                               various functional land and their spatial effects. The stations significantly impact urban
                                               passenger commuting which is mainly distributed in dense office buildings and industrial
                                               plants. Therefore, in the data selected in this paper, the building types mainly include
                                               residential, factory and office buildings. At the same time, the data points of “PDIA-SL” are
                                               all located in the southwest of Pudong International Airport, which can effectively target
                                               and study the weak rail transit development and passenger travel demand in the southwest
                                               of Pudong International Airport. The statistics of the data information are shown in Table 1,
                                               and the distribution of “PDIA-SL” dataset is shown in Figure 5.

                                               Table 1. Statistical results of the “PDIA-SL” dataset.

              Township                          Types of Building                              Types of Properties
                                                   Mid-High                      Residential         Factory          Office    House     SPR
                                    Mid Rise                        High Rise
                                                     Rise                         Building          Building         Building   -Holds   (CNY)
                 Huinan        98                      14              35             97                27              23      78,908   26,480
                Xinchang       61                      4               15             58                16              6       48,915   27,832
                 Datuan        48                       8              12             53                10               5      60,650   18,612
                Hangtou        70                       7              31             76                15              17      60,870   33,052
                Zhuqiao        50                       7               8             42                20               3      69,960   29,940
                Nicheng        52                      13              14             62                13               4      42,120   20,303
                Xuanqiao       37                       8               8             21                25               7      34,254   22,489
                Shuyuan        32                       2               6             35                 4               1      30,318   18,052
thematics 2023, Wanxiang       31
                11, FOR PEER REVIEW                     6               4             32                 8               1      21,231   18,844       11 o
                Laogang        33                       5               0             31                 7               0      11,030   17,576
           Nanhui New Town     65                      19              22             91                 7               8      79,176   33,748




                                          Figure
                                      Figure                         the residential,
                                                 5. Distributionofofthe
                                             5. Distribution             residential, factory andand
                                                                                        factory          buildings.
                                                                                                  officeoffice buildings.
                                               5. Case Study
                                           5.1. Study
                                      5. Case   Accessibility Distance Analysis of OPTICS under Different mpts
                                      5.1. Accessibility
                                               The OPTICSDistance  Analysis
                                                             algorithm       of OPTICS under
                                                                       is a generalization      Different
                                                                                           of DBSCAN.     Mpts
                                                                                                       After being processed by
                                         the OPTICS algorithm, the clustering of any mpts corresponding to the density can be
                                         The OPTICS
                                         obtained       algorithm
                                                  theoretically.     is a generalization
                                                                 As shown                    of DBSCAN.
                                                                           in Figure 6, the clustering resultsAfter being processed
                                                                                                               are displayed as the    by
                                      OPTICS
                                         most algorithm,   the clustering
                                               prominent “dent”.                any mpts
                                                                   The linearofchange  betweencorresponding               density
                                                                                                                  to thethe
                                                                                                 the dents represents       processcan be
                                      tained theoretically. As shown in Figure 6, the clustering results are displayed as the m
                                      prominent “dent”. The linear change between the dents represents the process of d
                                      points being retrieved and formed into clusters, and we mark these dents with ordi
                                      numbers for more apparent observation. When mpts = 30 , the curve is very rough. Es
Mathematics 2023, 11, 1539                                                                                                 11 of 29




                                      of data points being retrieved and formed into clusters, and we mark these dents with
                                      ordinal numbers for more apparent observation. When mpts = 30, the curve is very
                                      rough. Especially when the curve goes to each peak stage, the fluctuation is relatively
                                      large, which shows that the clusters are split during the process of being retrieved and
                                      clustered. It is divided into too many clusters, resulting in a small number of valid data
                                      points contained in each cluster. When mpts = 40, it can be clearly found that the curve
                                      becomes smooth, but the boundaries between clusters become blurred. Outliers act as
                                      bridges for connection, making two clusters mistakenly merge into a new cluster, which
                                      is not the ideal clustering result. When mpts = 50, the curve is relatively smooth and
                                      divided into five distinct clusters. We can regard it as the target of priority attention,
Mathematics 2023, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                       12 of 33
                                      and further verify it by comparing Silhouette plots. Based on the “PDIA-SL”      dataset, the
                                      reachability-like graphs of mpts = 30, mpts = 40 and mpts = 50 are shown in Figure 6.




                                                                  (a) mpts = 30




                                                                  (b) mpts = 40

                                Figure 6. Cont.
             2023, 11,
 Mathematics2023,
Mathematics              FOR PEER REVIEW
                   11, x1539                                                                                                         13 of 33        12 of 29




                                                                                (c) mpts = 50
                                  Figure 6. Reachability-like
                                    Figure                    plots plots
                                            6. Reachability-like          on “PDIA-SL”
                                                                    based based        dataset. dataset.
                                                                                on “PDIA-SL”

                                         TheTheSilhouette
                                                  Silhouettediagram     can measure
                                                                  diagram             the similarity
                                                                             can measure               between
                                                                                              the similarity        the nodethe
                                                                                                                  between       andnode
                                                                                                                                     the cluster
                                                                                                                                           and the cluster it
                                     belongs totocompared
                                  it belongs         compared     with  other
                                                                     with     clusters.
                                                                           other        The value
                                                                                   clusters.          valueisrange
                                                                                                The range        between    −1 and 1, −
                                                                                                                        is between      and    the 1, and the
                                                                                                                                           1 and
                                  larger
                                     largerthethevalue,       moremore
                                                         the the
                                                    value,            the node   matches
                                                                           the node        its cluster,
                                                                                        matches          rather than
                                                                                                    its cluster,               thanclusters.
                                                                                                                         adjacent
                                                                                                                     rather           adjacentIf clusters. If
                                  most
                                     mostpoints
                                             pointshave         Silhouette
                                                         highhigh
                                                      have                   value,value,
                                                                      Silhouette    then the   clustering
                                                                                            then           is appropriate;
                                                                                                   the clustering               if many points
                                                                                                                        is appropriate;       if many points
                                  have low or negative values, there are too many or few clusters. We use gray to fill the
                                     have low or negative values, there are too many or few clusters. We use gray to fill the
                                  clusters that maintain small and negative values in the graph, and bright colors to indicate
                                     clusters that maintain small and negative values in the graph, and bright colors to indicate
                                  groups with better clustering effects. As shown in Figure 7, we obtained the Silhouette
                                     groups with better clustering effects. As shown in Figure 7, we obtained the Silhouette
                                  diagram with mpts = 30 , mpts = 40 and mpts = 50 . When mpts = 30 , we found that
                                     diagram
                                  about   200 data      mptswere
                                                  withpoints             mpts = as
                                                                 = 30,processed       and mpts
                                                                                   40 outliers.  And= all   When
                                                                                                       50.data        mpts
                                                                                                                   points  were= 30,  we found
                                                                                                                                   divided   into that about
                                     200  data    points    were    processed     as
                                  seven clusters after clustering, but the distribution of color blocks was too crowded. Two into seven
                                                                                     outliers.    And    all data     points    were   divided
                                     clusters
                                  clusters    canafter clustering,
                                                   be retrieved         but objects
                                                                   in data  the distribution
                                                                                    between 608  ofand
                                                                                                     color  blocks
                                                                                                         669,    whichwas     too crowded.
                                                                                                                         contain   valid pointsTwo clusters
                                     can  be    retrieved    in  data   objects  between     608   and   669,    which
                                  close to the critical value of mpts . When mpts = 40 , we can find that there are       contain     valid   points close to
                                                                                                                                         a large
                                     the critical
                                  number             value of
                                              of Silhouette       mpts.between
                                                               values     When 0mpts     = 40,
                                                                                    and 0.5,      we canthat
                                                                                               indicating            thatare
                                                                                                             findthere     there    are number
                                                                                                                               a large  a large number of
                                  ofSilhouette                  the data 0points
                                                    valuesinbetween
                                      abnormal points                        and 0.5,  indicating
                                                                                   under              that there
                                                                                          this condition.     This is are a large
                                                                                                                        likely       number
                                                                                                                                          by tooof abnormal
                                                                                                                                 caused
                                  fewpoints    in the
                                        clusters   duedata
                                                        to thepoints    under
                                                                 influence               When mpts
                                                                                this condition.
                                                                            of outliers.            This= is
                                                                                                          50 likely    caused
                                                                                                               , the effect       by clustering
                                                                                                                            of this   too few clusters due
                                      relatively
                                  is to            ideal, and
                                        the influence           the peak When
                                                            of outliers.             each=
                                                                           value ofmpts     cluster  is greater
                                                                                               50, the  effect of  than
                                                                                                                     this0.6.  However,isthere
                                                                                                                           clustering       relatively ideal,
                                  will
                                     andstill
                                           the    more value
                                               bepeak     than 200    eachpoints
                                                                   of data         with
                                                                             cluster                 values
                                                                                         negative than
                                                                                      is greater              in this
                                                                                                           0.6.        case, and
                                                                                                                   However,         we need
                                                                                                                                  there  will to still be more
                                  further         datathe
                                            analyze
                                     than 200                      withresults.
                                                            clustering
                                                         points           negative values in this case, and we need to further analyze the
                                    clustering results.

                                    5.2. MST, Cluster Hierarchy and Extraction of Important Clusters
                                          A rough and intuitive impression of clusters can be obtained by comparing the
                                    reachability-like diagrams under different values of mpts and the corresponding Silhou-
                                    ette plots. Still, it is inefficient to achieve ideal clustering by giving the mpts value. We
                                    will transform the data space, calculate the Euclidean distance between points by Prim’s
                                    algorithm, calculate the edge’s weight value, and generate the MST. The MST is shown
                                    in Figure 8.
                                          The data points in the graph are regarded as vertices, and the edge weight is equal
                                    to the mutual reachability distance between any two points. Then a threshold lowered by
                                    high stability will be considered, and any edges with weights above this threshold will
                                    be gradually discarded. Eventually a hierarchy of clusters connecting components will be
                                    established at different threshold levels. Convert the MST into a cluster hierarchy as shown
                                    in Figure 9.
Mathematics            x FOR
            2023, 11,2023,
       Mathematics             PEER REVIEW
                           11, 1539                                                                                   1429of 33
                                                                                                                   13 of




                                                                                (a) mpts = 30




                                                                                (b) mpts = 40




                                                                                (c) mpts = 50
                                   Figure 7. Silhouette
                                       Figure            plots
                                               7. Silhouette    based
                                                             plots     onon“PDIA-SL”
                                                                   based    “PDIA-SL” dataset.
                                                                                      dataset.


                                   5.2. MST, Cluster Hierarchy and Extraction of Important Clusters
                                         A rough and intuitive impression of clusters can be obtained by comparing the reach-
                                   ability-like diagrams under different values of mpts and the corresponding Silhouette
                             Figure 8.
                              Figure 8.
                                  The data points in the graph are regarded as vertices, and the edge weight is equal to
                                   The data points in the graph are regarded as vertices, and the edge weight is equal to
                             the mutual reachability distance between any two points. Then a threshold lowered by
                              the mutual reachability distance between any two points. Then a threshold lowered by
                             high stability will be considered, and any edges with weights above this threshold will be
                              high stability will be considered, and any edges with weights above this threshold will be
                             gradually discarded. Eventually a hierarchy of clusters connecting components will be
                              gradually discarded. Eventually a hierarchy of clusters connecting components will be
Mathematics 2023, 11, 1539   established at different threshold levels. Convert the MST into a cluster hierarchy  14 of as
                                                                                                                        29
                              established at different threshold levels. Convert the MST into a cluster hierarchy as
                             shown in Figure 9.
                              shown in Figure 9.




                             Figure 8. MST of data points using Prim’s algorithm.
                             Figure 8.
                             Figure 8. MST of data
                                       MST of      points using
                                              data points       Prim’s algorithm.
                                                          using Prim’s algorithm.




                             Figure 9.
                             Figure                cluster hierarchy.
                                       Single-link cluster
                                    9. Single-link         hierarchy.
                             Figure 9. Single-link cluster hierarchy.
                                  It can be observed through the cluster hierarchy that the level corresponds to each
                             node, which corresponds to the critical value of clusters splitting into the components at
                             different threshold levels. The splitting stops when each object forms its cluster. When
                             the value of dmreach−k ( a, b) is in the range of (0.03, 0.06), follow the operation method
                             of AHP to cross-cut a dividing line at a certain level of distance, and observe the nodes
                             and independent vertical lines below the level. In this case, it is difficult to observe the
                             cut hierarchy due to the large number of samples. Especially when the value range of
                             dmreach−k ( a, b) is (0, 0.03), many vertical lines overlap together. Hence the need to further
Mathematics 2023, 11, 1539                                                                                              15 of 29




                             compress the cluster tree, and we hope the selected clusters can persist and have a longer
                             life cycle. The formula of considering the cluster persistence is

                                                                                       1
                                                                                λ=                                         (11)
                                                                                      eps

                             where λ = [1, +∞). When λ gradually increases (eps gradually decreases), the cluster will
                             become smaller until it disappears completely or decomposes into sub-clusters.
                                   In the tree, the life cycle of a cluster is defined as the length of the level where the
                             cluster is located. Therefore, it is necessary to define a stability calculation method that
                             can not only account for the existence of outliers in the hierarchy, but also consider the
                             density distribution of data points in the same cluster. Assuming that there is a cluster
                             Ci corresponding to the level of λmin (Ci ), it is defined as a maximum connected subset of
                             { x | f ( x ) ≥ λmin (Ci )}. The formula of relative mass excess of Ci at λmin (Ci ) is
                                                       (              R
                                                           ER (Ci ) = x∈C (λmax ( x, Ci ) − λmin (Ci ))dx
                                                                            i                                          (12)
                                                           λmax ( x, Ci ) = min{ f ( x ), λmax ( x, Ci )}

                             where λmax ( x, Ci ) is the density level at which cluster Ci splits or disappears [49].
                                 For the cluster hierarchy, under the condition that the dataset X, cluster label and
                             density threshold are given, the stability of Ci can be defined by the formula, i.e.,
                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                             1               1
                               S(Ci ) = ∑ λmax X j , Ci − λmin (Ci ) = ∑
                                                                         
                                                                                                     −                 (13)
                                        X ∈C                                  X ∈C   epsmin X j , Ci     epsmax (Ci )
                                          j   i                                           j   i

                                                                                                                               
                             where λmin (Ci ) is the minimum density level at which λmin (Ci ) exists, and λmax X j , Ci
                             means that the target cluster  X j will no longer belong to cluster Ci if it exceeds this density
                             level. The  eps min  X j , Ci and epsmin X j , Ci are the thresholds corresponding to eps.
                             Suppose C2 , C3 , · · · , Cj is the set of all clusters in the simplified compressed cluster tree,
                             and let S(Ci ) denote the stability of each cluster.
                                   Cluster extraction is to compress a large and complex cluster hierarchy into a smaller
                             tree with more information of each node. During traversal of the entire hierarchy, each
                             split is asked if the number of new clusters created by the split is less than the value of
                             mclsize. HDBSCAN only allows reporting of clusters with at least objects of mclsize, and
                             cases where a component with less than mclsize is disconnected from a cluster should
                             not be considered detached. Any stray components are flagged as outliers. We can easily
                             perform cardinality checking and labeling of components by starting from the endpoints
                             of the edges being removed. This simplification process can greatly reduce the number of
                             clusters in the hierarchy, as shown in Figure 10.
                                   Our goal is to extract the most prominent clusters as a flat solution to maximize the
                             overall stability of the extracted clusters. The formula of calculating the maximum value of
                             the overall stability is
                                                                                      j
                                                                   max J = ∑ δi S(Ci )                                     (14)
                                                                   δ2 ,...,δj        i =2

                             where δi ∈ {0, 1}, i = 2, 3, · · · , j. δi indicates whether cluster Ci contains a flat solution
                             (δi = 1) or does not contain a flat solution (δi = 0).
                                  For the decision variables of δ2 , δ3 , · · · , δj , we want to prevent clusters from being
                             selected on the same node in the subtree. Because nested clusters must be mutually
                             exclusive, only one label can be assigned to each object. Applying dynamic programming,
                             we assemble intermediate solutions upward into the tree to solve the subtree problem
                             of increasing scale. Process each node except the root C1 , and decide on each node from
                             the bottom up whether to choose Ci or the best cluster in the subtree of Ci . To make a
                             decision at node Ci , we recursively update the total stability Ŝ(Ci ) of the selected cluster.
                             The formula of Ŝ(Ci ) is
Mathematics 2023, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                         17 of 33
Mathematics 2023, 11, 1539                                                                                                                      16 of 29




                                      Figure      Single-linkcluster
                                              10.Single-link
                                       Figure10.              clusterhierarchy.
                                                                      hierarchy.
                                                              (
                                          Our goal is to extractS(Ci )the most prominent clusters              i f Cas  a flat solution to maximize the
                                                                                                                     i is a lea f node
                                                   Ŝ(Ci )of=the extracted
                                    overall stability                       clusters.    The formula of calculating the maximum value              (15)
                                                                max S(Ci ), Ŝ Cil + Ŝ(Cir )                   i f Ci is an intrnal node
                                    of the overall stability is
                                   where Cil and Cir are the binary subtrees of cluster Ci [16].
                                                                                                     j

                                                                                                        i S ( Ci )
                                                                                              J = δtopological.
                                         We work up the tree in the ordermax           of reverse                            If the sum stability of sub-
                                                                                                                                                      (14)
                                                                                   δ 2 ,…,δ j     i = 2 the Ŝ ( C ) is the sum of the subcluster’s
                                   clusters is greater than the cluster’s stability,            then                  i
                                   stability. On the other hand, if the stability of a cluster is greater than the sum of sub-
                                    where δi ∈{0, 1} , i = 2, 3,, j . δi indicates whether cluster Ci contains a flat solu-
                                   clusters, we    will deselect all its descendants. After reaching the root node, we refer to the
                                    tion ( δi =selected
                                   currently    1 ) or does   not contain
                                                            cluster         a flat
                                                                    as the flat     solution
                                                                                 cluster       and( δreturn
                                                                                                       i = 0 ). to results. The extracted cluster       is
Mathematics 2023, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                          18 of 33
                                          Forcluster
                                   also the    the decision
                                                       with the variables   of δ 2block
                                                                                    , δ 3 ,in, δthe
                                                                  largest color                     j , we    want to prevent
                                                                                                        compressed          tree, andclusters
                                                                                                                                       we markfrom  being
                                                                                                                                                it with  a
                                   red          asthe
                                        circle,on
                                    selected           sameinnode
                                                    shown       Figure   11. subtree. Because nested clusters must be mutually exclu-
                                                                      in the
                                    sive, only one label can be assigned to each object. Applying dynamic programming, we
                                    assemble intermediate solutions upward into the tree to solve the subtree problem of in-
                                    creasing scale. Process each node except the root C1 , and decide on each node from the
                                    bottom up whether to choose Ci or the best cluster in the subtree of Ci . To make a de-
                                    cision at node C , we recursively update the total stability Sˆ ( C ) of the selected cluster.
                                                             i                                                           i

                                       The formula of Sˆ ( Ci ) is

                                                                        S ( Ci )                          if Ci is a leaf node
                                                           Sˆ ( Ci ) = 
                                                                            {            ( ) ( )} if C is an internal node
                                                                         max S ( Ci ) , S Cil + S Cir
                                                                                          ˆ       ˆ
                                                                                                                 i
                                                                                                                                                     (15)


                                       where Cil and Cir are the binary subtrees of cluster Ci [16].
                                            We work up the tree in the order of reverse topological. If the sum stability of sub-
                                       clusters is greater than the cluster’s stability, then the Sˆ ( Ci ) is the sum of the subclus-
                                       ter’s stability. On the other hand, if the stability of a cluster is greater than the sum of sub-
                                       clusters, we will deselect all its descendants. After reaching the root node, we refer to the
                                       currently selected cluster as the flat cluster and return to results. The extracted cluster is
                                       also the cluster with the largest color block in the compressed tree, and we mark it with a
                                       red circle, as shown in Figure 11.
                                     Figure 11. Important clusters.
                                     Figure 11. Important clusters.

                                     5.3. Outlier Monitoring of GLOSH
                                         Define the target cluster with the highest density in Ci as X l , and X l is the in-
                                     nermost data point in cluster Ci . When the threshold is increased from top to bottom
Mathematics 2023, 11, 1539                                                                                                             17 of 29




                                 5.3. Outlier Monitoring of GLOSH
                                      Define the target cluster with the highest density in Ci as Xl , and Xl is the innermost
                                 data point in cluster Ci . When the threshold is increased from top to bottom through the
                                 hierarchy, Xl is the cluster that survives the longest before each cluster becomes the outliers.
                                 Therefore we define the formula for reference density and outlier, i.e.,

                                                                                              1
                                                                             f ( Xl ) =                                                   (16)
                                                                                          dcore ( Xl )

                                                                                       f max ( Xi ) − f ( Xi )
                                                                    Outlier ( Xi ) =                                                      (17)
                                                                                             f max ( Xi )
                                 where f ( Xl ) serves as the reference density for each Xi , and

                                                                                                      1
                                                                      f max ( Xi ) = f ( Xl ) =                                           (18)
                                                                                                  dcore ( Xl )

                                      If Equation (17) is used to calculate the situation of mclsize > 1, Xi below the threshold
                                 will be attached to a new cluster in advance. In order to solve this problem, this paper uses
                                 the GLOSH (Global-Local Outlier Scores from Hierarchies) detection method [50], i.e.,

                                                                           λmax ( Xi ) − λ( Xi )      epsmax ( Xi )
                                                        GLOSH ( Xi ) =                           = 1−                                     (19)
                                                                               λmax ( Xi )              eps( Xi )

                                            Figure 12 contains the initial dataset and the fitting curve of samples, and the GLOSH
                                      score interval is between [0, 1]. We plot the histogram of the GLOSH score with a light blue
                                      area, where the threshold is set at the quartile, and fit the histogram with the dark blue
                                      line. The higher the GLOSH score, the more likely the point is an outlier. 19
    Mathematics 2023, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW
                                                                                                                      Weof extract
                                                                                                                            33
                                                                                                                                   the
                                      quartiles in the figure to detect outliers, and the results show that only a few points are
                                      abnormal, which meets the requirements of ideal clustering.




                                 Figure
                                 Figure 12.     graphofof
                                            Bargraph
                                        12.Bar            GLOSH
                                                        GLOSH    score.
                                                              score.

                                       We mark
                                       We  markthe       ideal
                                                    theideal    clusters
                                                             clusters      in the
                                                                       in the      results
                                                                               results      in blue,
                                                                                       in blue,       and
                                                                                                and the    the outliers
                                                                                                         outliers         in shown
                                                                                                                             red, asinshown in
                                                                                                                  in red, as
                                 Figure 13a,b. Through the analysis of HDBSCAN, we can get the ideal target clusters,clusters,
                                 Figure   13a,b.   Through     the  analysis    of HDBSCAN,        we  can  get the  ideal  target  as       as
                                 shown    in  Figure    13c.  And    we   use   different  colors   to distinguish    and
                                 shown in Figure 13c. And we use different colors to distinguish and mark the clusters.    mark   the  clusters.
                                 Next,
                                 Next, we    stillneed
                                         westill   needtoto  find
                                                           find  thethe core
                                                                     core  from  eacheach
                                                                               from         cluster
                                                                                       cluster       to represent
                                                                                               to represent         thelocation
                                                                                                             the ideal   ideal location
                                                                                                                                of the of the
                                      transit station.
                                 rail transit
                                 rail          station.
                                  Figure 12. Bar graph of GLOSH score.

                                        We mark the ideal clusters in the results in blue, and the outliers in red, as shown in
                                  Figure 13a,b. Through the analysis of HDBSCAN, we can get the ideal target clusters, as
Mathematics 2023, 11, 1539        shown in Figure 13c. And we use different colors to distinguish and mark the clusters.              18 of 29
                                  Next, we still need to find the core from each cluster to represent the ideal location of the
                                  rail transit station.




  Mathematics 2023, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                               20 of 33


                                                                    (a) Distribution of outliers




                                                                  (b) Distribution of ideal targets




                                                   (c) Ideal clustering results from the analysis of HDBSCAN
                                   Figure 13. Result of GLOSH detection: (a) The data points of the red label are outliers; (b) The data
                                        Figure 13. Result of GLOSH detection: (a) The data points of the red label are outliers; (b) The data
                                   points of the navy blue label are ideal targets; (c) The data points marked with non-purple color as
                                        points   of the navy blue label are ideal targets; (c) The data points marked with non-purple color as
                                   the ideal clusters.
                                       the ideal clusters.
                                   5.4. Determination and Correction of Ideal Points in Stations
                                        It can be seen from Figure 13 that the ideal clustering results generated by HDBSCAN
                                   are processed by different colors, in which a total of 16 clusters are generated. Then we
                                   marked them in order with a serial number. Fit along each cluster’s edges, draw various
                                   regular plane figures and label them. We use Auto CAD to calculate the geometric center
Mathematics 2023, 11, 1539                                                                                                                    19 of 29




                                   5.4. Determination and Correction of Ideal Points in Stations
                                            It can be seen from Figure 13 that the ideal clustering results generated by HDBSCAN
                                      are processed by different colors, in which a total of 16 clusters are generated. Then we
                                      marked them in order with a serial number. Fit along each cluster’s edges, draw various
                                      regular plane figures and label them. We use Auto CAD to calculate the geometric center
    Mathematics 2023, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                     21 of 33
                                      of each planar figure and regard it as an ideal point for station selection,                 as shown in
                                      Figure 14. After calculation, the coordinates of the geometric center points of clusters
                                      1–16 after fitting are as follows: (121.5976, 31.0753), (121.5856, 31.0325), (121.6524, 31.0250),
                                       (121.7126, 31.0714),
                                      (121.7126,   31.0714),(121.7183,
                                                              (121.7183,31.0411), (121.7064,
                                                                           31.0411),          31.0283),
                                                                                       (121.7064,       (121.7572,
                                                                                                   31.0283),       31.1520),
                                                                                                              (121.7572,     (121.7693,
                                                                                                                           31.1520),   (121.7693,
                                       31.1127), (121.7615,  31.0450), (121.7506,  30.9729), (121.8447,  31.0290), (121.8189,
                                      31.1127), (121.7615, 31.0450), (121.7506, 30.9729), (121.8447, 31.0290), (121.8189,     30.9656),30.9656),
                                       (121.8073, 30.9027), (121.8775, 30.9663), (121.8516, 30.8654), (121.9206, 30.9027).
                                      (121.8073,   30.9027), (121.8775, 30.9663), (121.8516, 30.8654), (121.9206, 30.9027).




                                                                                      ⑦

                                                                                       ⑧


                                                       ①
                                                                               ④
                                    Longitude




                                                                               ⑤      ⑨
                                                      ②                                              ⑪
                                                                  ③        ⑥


                                                                                      ⑩                      ⑭
                                                                                                ⑫



                                                                                               ⑬                    ⑯


                                                                                                         ⑮




                                                                                   Latitude
                                   Figure
                                   Figure 14.     clusters
                                              Fitclusters
                                          14.Fit          toto regular
                                                             regular   images.
                                                                     images.

                                           By sub-meter observation of the above coordinate points through Google Earth, the
                                           By sub-meter observation of the above coordinate points through Google Earth, the
                                   rail  transit  stationshould
                                    rail transit station    should    provide
                                                                   provide       maximum
                                                                             maximum           convenience
                                                                                          convenience            for passengers
                                                                                                         for passengers             and prevent
                                                                                                                           and prevent   the       the
                                   impact    of concentrated      passenger    flow    on the station.   The   station’s location
                                    impact of concentrated passenger flow on the station. The station’s location should be          should    be about
                                   300
                                    about   away
                                         m 300      fromfrom
                                                m away     residential,    commercial
                                                                 residential,  commercial  and
                                                                                             and  officebuildings,
                                                                                                office    buildings, as  wellas
                                                                                                                      as well  asindustrial
                                                                                                                                   industrial plants
                                   and
                                    plantslarge
                                             andstadiums      [51]. Meanwhile,
                                                  large stadiums      [51]. Meanwhile,groundwater
                                                                                           groundwatersources,     cultivated
                                                                                                            sources,           land
                                                                                                                      cultivated  landand
                                                                                                                                        andwetlands
                                    wetlandsbeshould
                                   should         avoided     as much
                                                        be avoided         as possible.
                                                                       as much                  density
                                                                                           TheThe
                                                                                 as possible.      densityof  ofMetro   linesand
                                                                                                                               and
                                                                                                                 Metro lines      thethe
                                                                                                                                      num-number of
                                    ber of stations
                                   stations    are farare      less than
                                                          farthan
                                                        less         those those  of the
                                                                             of the      buses.
                                                                                     buses.      Thus
                                                                                              Thus   thethelayout
                                                                                                             layoutofofstations
                                                                                                                        stations should
                                                                                                                                 shouldbe  be closely
                                    closely  integrated   with  urban   roads  and  transit networks,   and   should  be
                                   integrated with urban roads and transit networks, and should be coordinated with the  coordinated   with
                                    the urban
                                   urban        planning
                                             planning          thearea
                                                         ofofthe          wherethe
                                                                   area where      thestations areare
                                                                                        stations   located.   To attract
                                                                                                       located.          passengers
                                                                                                                    To attract        to the to the
                                                                                                                                passengers
                                    greatest  extent,  facilitate the  transfer  between    buses and   subways,
                                   greatest extent, facilitate the transfer between buses and subways, and further  and  further make    rail
                                                                                                                                           make rail
                                    transit a backbone artery with fast and large traffic volume, the rail transit stations are
                                   transit a backbone artery with fast and large traffic volume, the rail transit stations are
                                    generally located at road intersections. Considering the above factors, we have corrected
                                   generally    located at road intersections. Considering the above factors, we have corrected
                                    the coordinates of 16 ideal sites in Figure 14 and marked the locations in each observation
                                    scene as shown inofFigure
                                   the  coordinates                15. sites in Figure 14 and marked the locations in each observation
                                                            16 ideal
                                   scene as shown in Figure 15.

                                   5.5. Analysis of Optimal Station Spacing
                                        According to the cost-oriented optimization model of Equation (9), if we want to
                                   establish the relationship between the net cost and the station spacing, we need to establish
                                   the relational expressions between Zsco , Zland , Ztic , Zcon , Zope , Ztime and the station spacing
                                   d. From the analysis of the impact of station spacing in Section 2, it can be obtained
                                   Zsco = 1.2Zcon . In order to calculate the social benefits of the daily average land appreciation
                                   along the line, we investigated the data of average property (α), occupancy ratio (β) and
                                   gross plot ratio (θ) of residential, commercial and industrial land within 1200 m of attraction
        Mathematics 2023, 11, 1539                                                                                                              20 of 29




                                            range from 2009 to 2015, as shown in Table 2. To more intuitively display the changes in
           Mathematics 2023, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                      22 of 33
                                            property values and occupancy ratios of the three types of land use, it is converted into a
                                            3D waterfall diagram, as shown in Figure 16.




Mathematics 2023, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                                    23

                                            Figure15.
                                            Figure     Correction
                                                   15.Correction    of each
                                                                 of each    ideal
                                                                         ideal     point
                                                                               point in theinobservation map. map.
                                                                                              the observation

                                            5.5. Analysis of Optimal Station Spacing
                                                 According to the cost-oriented optimization model of Equation (9), if we want to es-
                                            tablish the relationship between the net cost and the station spacing, we need to establish
                                            the relational expressions between Z sco , Z land , Ztic , Z con , Z ope , Z time and the station
                                            spacing d . From the analysis of the impact of station spacing in Section 2, it can be ob-
                                            tained Z sco = 1.2Z con . In order to calculate the social benefits of the daily average land ap-
                                            preciation along the line, we investigated the data of average property ( α ), occupancy
                                            ratio ( β ) and gross plot ratio ( θ ) of residential, commercial and industrial land within
                                            1200 m of attraction range from 2009 to 2015, as shown in Table 2. To more intuitively
                                            display the changes in property values and occupancy ratios of the three types of land
                                            use, it is converted into a 3D waterfall diagram, as shown in Figure 16.

                                            Table 2. Average property and occupancy ratio of the residential, commercial and industrial land.

             Year           c1           β1          θ1          c2               β2          θ2           c3            β3          θ3
             2009        1579.49       17.16%      1.59       2014.65          20.84%        1.97       2036.41        62.00%       1.54
             2010        1658.32       21.47%       1.61      12651.34         16.01%        2.13       2436.73        62.52%       1.54
             2011         608.03       21.39%       1.80       570.63          14.82%        2.38        199.38        63.79%       1.56
             2012         452.28       16.46%      1.81        −93.72          12.77%        2.31       −480.51        70.77%       1.63
                                           Figure 16. 3Dwaterfall
                                       Figure            waterfall diagram       average
                                                                              of of       property   value and   occupancy                residential,
                                                                                                                            ratio of theratio
             2013        1587.46       27.47% 16. 3D
                                                   1.89             diagram
                                                              2391.55          19.77%average   property
                                                                                             2.51           value
                                                                                                        2007.78     and   occupancy
                                                                                                                       52.76%       1.70       of the reside
             2014         −69.8            commercial
                                       commercial
                                       26.75%          and industrial
                                                      and industrial
                                                    1.87              land: (a) Changes
                                                              −323.21 land:16.13%        in
                                                                                (a) Changes average   property
                                                                                             2.07in average   property
                                                                                                        −612.38 value from 2009
                                                                                                                           value from
                                                                                                                       57.12%   to 2015  in Shanghai;
                                                                                                                                    1.54 2009 to 2015 in Sh
                                                   1.88in occupancy
                                           (b) Changes        2610.45ratio from   2009 to 2015  in Shanghai.
             2015         433.07       hai; (b) Changes
                                       57.82%              in occupancy      ratio
                                                                               21.75%from 2009
                                                                                             2.64  to 2015  in Shanghai.
                                                                                                        1810.64        20.43%       1.51

                                            Table 2. Average property and occupancy ratio of the residential, commercial and industrial land.
                                            Assuming that the total length of the planned rail transit line is 56 km, substitut
            Year             c1                                 c2                               c3
                                           β1       θ1                     β2          θ2                    β3
                                                                                                                      56 θ3
            2009          1579.49      above
                                       17.16% data 1.59
                                                    into Equation
                                                             2014.65 (5).20.84%
                                                                           We can calculate
                                                                                      1.97       Zland = 16281.1[int(
                                                                                              2036.41      62.00%       ) + 1] . Combi
                                                                                                                        1.54
            2010          1658.32      21.47%      1.61     12651.34    16.01%        2.13    2436.73      62.52%     d 1.54
            2011           608.03      Equations
                                       21.39%    (1)           the formula
                                                      and (7),570.63
                                                   1.80                      of the relationship
                                                                        14.82%        2.38       between63.79%
                                                                                               199.38         Ztik and the
                                                                                                                        1.56 station spa
            2012           452.28      d is
                                       16.46%      1.81      − 93.72    12.77%        2.31    − 480.51     70.77%       1.63
            2013          1587.46       27.47%          1.89        2391.55     19.77%      2.51    2007.78     52.76%      1.70
            2014           −69.8        26.75%          1.87        −323.21     16.13% 7    2.07  6 − 612.38    57.12%      1.54
            2015          433.07        57.82%          1.88           Ztik = −1.7143
                                                                    2610.45     21.75% d + 0.0058    0.7766d 5 −20.43%
                                                                                            2.64 d +1810.64       75.3d 4 + 1.51
                                                                                2326.7d 3 − 27877.5d 2 − 11688d + 6.606 ×108
                                                Assuming that the total length of the planned rail transit line is 56 km, substitute the
                                              According
                                            above             the relevant
                                                  data intotoEquation (5). Wedata and experience
                                                                              can calculate           of rail[int
                                                                                            Zland = 16281.1       ( 56
                                                                                                              transitd )+construction
                                                                                                                          1]. Combiningin Shang
                                       the average construction cost of a single station is about 8.7752 ×107 CNY, and we se
                                       service life of the subway to 50 years [52]. The formula for construction cost is
                                                                                                                  56
Mathematics 2023, 11, 1539                                                                                                                    21 of 29




                             Equations (1) and (7), the formula of the relationship between Ztik and the station spacing
                             d is
                                                 Ztik = −1.7143d7 + 0.0058d6 + 0.7766d5 − 75.3d4 +
                                                                                                                    (20)
                                                        2326.7d3 − 27877.5d2 − 11688d + 6.606 × 108
                                  According to the relevant data and experience of rail transit construction in Shanghai,
                             the average construction cost of a single station is about 8.7752 × 107 CNY, and we set the
                             service life of the subway to 50 years [52]. The formula for construction cost is

                                                                                       56
                                                              Zcon = 4808.33[int(         ) + 1]                                                 (21)
                                                                                        d
                                  Up to now, the number of trains put into operation in Shanghai is about 480, the total
                             number of stations is 508 (including the maglev line), and the body of the subway train is
                             made of aluminum alloy [53]. Each Electric multiple units (EMU) is equipped with one
                             driver and attendant, assuming that the drivers’ salary is 1.5 times that of the attendant.
                             And expenditures such as crew allowances and additional wages generally account for 25%
                             of the basic salary. The basic monthly salary of attendants is about 5000 CNY, and the basic
                             monthly salary of drivers is about 7500 CNY. There are about twenty station attendants at a
                             subway station, with an average basic salary of 4000 CNY/month. From this calculation, it
                             can be obtained that C1 = 3854.2. According to the electricity consumption statistics of the
                             Shanghai Metro corporation for many years, the total electricity consumption of all trains
                             during the downtime is 2,935,032 KW·h, and the power cost of aluminum alloy trains is
                             about 0.51 CNY/KW [54]. From this calculation, it can be obtained C2 = 129.94.
                                  According to statistics, the total cost of station equipment is 6.7162 million CNY per
                             year [55]. In summary, the calculation formula of Zope can be obtained, i.e.,

                                                                                       56
                                                              Zope = 4020.34[int(         ) + 1]                                                 (22)
                                                                                        d
                                   When passengers arrive at or leave a rail transit station, there must be a certain amount
                             of walking time. Assuming that the average walking speed of passengers is 1 m/s, whether
                             to choose to walk to or leave the station depends on the walking distance. The bus is
                             the most cost-effective way for passengers to travel distance and fare. Therefore, if the
                             walking distance exceeds the bus-stop spacing, passengers will often choose to take public
                             transportation instead of walking. Therefore, we believe this walking distance should be
                             less than the average spacing between bus stops, which is about 450 m. Therefore, we
                             can conclude that the time spent by passengers walking to the rail transit station is about
                             450 s (t1 ). Generally speaking, the time to arrive at the station from the place of origin (t1 )
                             is equal to the time for passengers to leave the station and arrive at the destination (t5 ).
                             Assume that when passengers arrive at the station, they have fully experienced the stop
                             time between the start and end points, and the average time that passengers need to wait
                             at the station (t2 ) is half of the time difference between the departures of the two trains [55].
                             In the case of not considering the delayed operation of trains, the average interval between
                             two-way subway departures is 5 min. And we can get t2 = 300 · int( 56      d ). The time (t3 ) for
                             passengers to travel with the subway is the following formula, i.e.,
                                                                                                       2                          2
                                                                                                  v                            v
                                                   v       v       3.6 · [1000d − 12 a1 ·       3.6a1        − 21 a2 ·       3.6a2        ]
                                          t3 =         +       +                                                                                 (23)
                                                 3.6a1   3.6a2                                   v

                             where v is the steady running speed of the subway (km/h), a1 is the starting acceleration of
                             the train (m/s2 ), a2 is the braking acceleration of the train (m/s2 ).
                                  Assume that the steady running speed of the train is 80 km/h, the starting acceleration is
                             0.9 m/s2 , and the braking acceleration is 1 m/s2 . We can calculate t3 = (45d − 2.75) · int( 56
                                                                                                                           d ).
                             The stop time must meet the time requirements for passengers to get on and off the train.
                             Secondly, reducing the stop time will improve the operating efficiency of rail transit and
Mathematics 2023, 11, 1539                                                                                                 22 of 29




                             reduce the travel time of passengers. Combined with the analysis of intermediate rail
                             transit stops in various places, it is assumed that the stop time is the 30 s. We can calculate
                             t4 = 30 · int( 56
                                             d ). To sum up, the formula of total travel time is

                                                                                                     56
                                               t = t1 + t2 + t3 + t4 + t5 = (327.26 + 45d) · int(       ) + 900               (24)
                                                                                                     d
                                  Combine Equations (8) and (24) to calculate the total time cost of passenger travel, and
                             the formula is

                                 Ztime = (327.26 + 45d) · int( 56                         −5 7             −3 6
                                                                         
                                                                d ) + 900 · (−5.714 × 10 d + 2.833 × 10 d +            (25)
                                              5       4               3          2
                                        0.259d − 25.1d + 775.567d − 9292.5d − 3896d + 8.738 × 10 )       6


                                  By substituting the Zsco , Zland , Ztic , Zcon , Zope and Ztime into Equation (9), we can
                             obtain the functional relationship between the maximum net cost (maxZ) and the station
                             spacing. Meanwhile, to weaken the influence of high-power terms on the function value,
                             this paper modifies the functional relationship. The revised formula is

                                maxZ = 13222.43[int( 56                                56                         −5
                                                     d ) + 1] − (327.26 + 45d ) · [int( d ) + 900] · (−5.714 × 10
                                        7              − 3 6        5         4              3           2
                                      d + 2.833 × 10 d + 0.259d − 25.1d + 775.567d − 9292.5d −
                                                                                                                              (26)
                                      3896d + 8.738 × 106 ) − 1.7143d7 + 0.0058d6 + 0.7766d5 − 75.3d4 +
                                      2326.7d3 − 27877.5d2 − 11688d − 3.993 × 1012

                                  At present, we know the functional relationship between the cost and the station
                             spacing. Then, we hope to obtain the maximum value of the objective function, that is,
                             the distance of the optimal station spacing. In this paper, particle swarm optimization
                             (PSO) is used to calculate the optimal global solution of the objective function. PSO is
                             an optimization method to efficiently solve nonlinear, non-differentiable and multi-peak
                             complex propositions [56]. The PSO algorithm uses massless and volumeless particles
                             to simulate the birds in the flock, and the particles have only two properties, namely
                             velocity and position. Among them, velocity represents the speed of particle movement,
                             and position represents the direction of particle movement. The position of the particle
                             i in N-dimensional space is expressed as Mi = (m1 , m2 , · · · , mn ), and the flight speed
                             is expressed as Vi = (v1 , v2 , · · · , vn ). Each particle has a fitness value determined by the
                             objective function and can mark the best position found so far (pbest) and the current
                             position (Xi ). The PSO algorithm is initialized as a group of random particles, and the opti-
                             mal solution is found through iteration. During the iteration process, the particle updates
                             the optimal value by tracking two extreme values (pbest and gbest). After finding these
                             two optimal values, the particle updates its velocity and position through the following
                             formula, i.e.,
                                       
                                            vi = ω · mi + e1 · rand() · ( pbesti − mi ) + e2 · rand() · ( gbesti − mi )
                                                                                                                          (27)
                                            mi = mi + vi

                             where vi is the particle velocity, mi (i = 1, 2, · · · , N) is the current position of the particle, N
                             is the total number of particles in the group, rand() is a random number between (0, 1), e1
                             and e2 are learning factors, and ω is the inertia factor. And when the value of ω is large, the
                             global optimization ability is strong, and the local optimization ability is weak; when the
                             value is small, the global optimization ability is weak, and the local optimization ability
                             is strong.
                                   The formula for calculating ω is

                                                                     (ωini − ωend ) · ( Gk − g)
                                                               ω=                                                             (28)
                                                                            Gk + ωend

                             where ωini is the initial inertia weight, ωend is the inertia weight when iterating to the
                             maximum evolution algebra, and Gk is the maximum number of iterations [57].
Mathematics 2023, 11, 1539                                                                                                               23 of 29




                                         Using the PSO algorithm to calculate Equation (26), the relationship between the
                                   number of PSO iterations and the optimal function value can be obtained. Figure 17a
                                   describes the fitness changes of the global best of the swarm at each iteration. Figure 17b
                                   shows the final state positions of particles during the iteration process, which are marked
                                   with circles of various colors. To prevent conflicts with buses, improve the overall utilization
                                   of urban transport and reduce the waste of traffic resources, the average station spacing of
                                   rail transit shoud be greater than the distance between bus stations, which is 450 m. We
                                   have obtained that the distance of the optimal station spacing is 683.6 m, which meets
Mathematics 2023, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                   26 ofthis
                                                                                                                                 33
                                   requirement. In order to facilitate the determination of Metro lines, we approximately take
                                   the optimal station spacing as 680 m.




                                 Figure17.
                                Figure              optimalvalue
                                            Globaloptimal
                                        17.Global            valueofofthe
                                                                       thetarget
                                                                           targetfunction  usingthe
                                                                                  functionusing      PSOalgorithm:
                                                                                                 thePSO    algorithm:(a)  Therelationship
                                                                                                                      (a)The  relationship
                                 betweenthe
                                between   thenumber       PSOiteration
                                              numberofofPSO               andthe
                                                               iterationand       optimalfunction
                                                                              theoptimal            value;(b)
                                                                                                           (b)The
                                                                                          functionvalue;           optimalfunction
                                                                                                               Theoptimal            value
                                                                                                                           functionvalue
                                 correspondstotothe
                                corresponds          stationspacing
                                                 thestation  spacingd.d.

                                      DeterminationofofMetro
                                 5.6.Determination
                                5.6.                                 Lines
                                                             MetroLines
                                       Tosimplify
                                      To   simplifythe       calculation,we
                                                       thecalculation,         assumethat
                                                                           weassume      thatthe   Earthisisaaregular
                                                                                                               regularsphere.
                                                                                               theEarth                           Thelatitude
                                                                                                                         sphere.The    latitude
                                 difference   at  31 ◦ north latitude is 111.194 km, and the longitude difference is 96.297 km [58].
                                difference at 31° north latitude is 111.194 km, and the longitude difference is 96.297 km
                                 Consider
                                [58].        the calculated
                                      Consider     the calculated      corrected
                                                                 and and         coordinates
                                                                           corrected             as ideal
                                                                                       coordinates        points
                                                                                                      as ideal     of station
                                                                                                                points         selection,
                                                                                                                        of station        mark
                                                                                                                                    selection,
                                 them   in  the  satellite   image,   and  connect   the  ideal  points  with   smooth
                                mark them in the satellite image, and connect the ideal points with smooth curves. During curves.  During     the
                                 connection process, attention should be paid to avoiding mountains, wetlands, cultivated
                                the connection process, attention should be paid to avoiding mountains, wetlands, culti-
                                 land and groundwater sources, and different colors are used to distinguish the five selection
                                vated land and groundwater sources, and different colors are used to distinguish the five
                                 lines. On the selected lines, set up the rail transit stations every 680 m. The selected location
                                selection lines. On the selected lines, set up the rail transit stations every 680 m. The se-
                                 of stations should also be close to the main traffic arterial and about 300 m away from large
                                lected location of stations should also be close to the main traffic arterial and about 300 m
                                 residential, commercial, factory buildings and large gymnasiums. The ideal stations and
                                away from large residential, commercial, factory buildings and large gymnasiums. The
                                 five route selections for the expected planning are shown in Figure 18.
                                ideal stations and five route selections for the expected planning are shown in Figure 18.
                                       Route 1 passes through ideal locations 1, 4 and 8, and connects Zhoupu, Liuzao and
                                      Route 1 passes through ideal locations 1, 4 and 8, and connects Zhoupu, Liuzao and
                                 Zhuqiao Town in Pudong New Area in the east-west direction. Route 2 passes through the
                                Zhuqiao Town in Pudong New Area in the east-west direction. Route 2 passes through
                                 ideal locations 7, 8 and 9, mainly along Zhuqiao and Huinan Town to the north of Pudong
                                the ideal locations 7, 8 and 9, mainly along Zhuqiao and Huinan Town to the north of
                                 International Airport. Route 3 passes through the ideal locations 2, 3, 6, 9 and 11, which
                                Pudong International Airport. Route 3 passes through the ideal locations 2, 3, 6, 9 and 11,
                                 is the longest route in the east-west planning in this paper, crossing Xinchang, Xuanqiao,
                                which
                                 Huinan  is and   longest route
                                            the Zhuqiao        Town.inItthe  east-west
                                                                         straddles        planning
                                                                                     Xinchang,        in this paper,
                                                                                                  Xuanqiao,    Huinancrossing      Xinchang,
                                                                                                                          and Zhuqiao     Town
                                Xuanqiao,     Huinan       and   Zhuqiao    Town.    It  straddles   Xinchang,     Xuanqiao,
                                 and can be connected with the existing No. 11 Metro line and the future rail transit lines      Huinan    andin
                                Zhuqiao
                                 the Minhang        and can
                                            Towndistrict.        be connected
                                                               Route             with thethe
                                                                      4 passes through       existing   No. 11 Metro
                                                                                                ideal locations   10, 12,line      theand
                                                                                                                              and 16,
                                                                                                                           14 and       future
                                                                                                                                             this
                                 route mainly connects Nanhui New Town. Route 5 passes through the ideal locations 12,
                                rail transit  lines  in  the   Minhang    district. Route   4 passes   through   the  ideal  locations  10,  4, 5,
                                 6, and
                                14       16,and
                                    10, 13,  and 15.       is themainly
                                                   thisItroute     longestconnects   NanhuiinNew
                                                                            route selected                             5 passes in
                                                                                                      Town. Routeplanning
                                                                                                 the north-south                 through    the
                                                                                                                                    this paper,
                                ideal  locations    4,  5,  6, 10,  13, and  15. It is  the  longest
                                 which mainly crosses Chuansha, Xuanqiao, Datuan and Nicheng Town.     route  selected   in  the north-south
                                planning in this paper, which mainly crosses Chuansha, Xuanqiao, Datuan and Nicheng
                                Town.
Mathematics 2023, 11, 1539                                                                                                                                24 of 29
    Mathematics 2023, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                   27 of 33




                                    Figure 18. The ideal station location and five routes of the expected plan.
                                    Figure 18. The ideal station location and five routes of the expected plan.

                                       Comparative Analysis
                                    6. Comparative
                                    6.              Analysiswith DBSCAN
                                                              with      and and
                                                                   DBSCAN   K-Means Clustering
                                                                                K-Means        ResultsResults
                                                                                         Clustering
                                          Thispaper
                                          This         usesDBSCAN
                                                 paperuses   DBSCAN        K-means
                                                                      andand        algorithms
                                                                              K-means          to analyze
                                                                                        algorithms        the “PDIA-SL”
                                                                                                     to analyze         dataset dataset
                                                                                                                the “PDIA-SL”
                                     in the above case. We will compare and analyze the clustering results of DBSCAN, K-
                                    in the above case. We will compare and analyze the clustering results of DBSCAN, K-means
                                     means and HDBSCAN algorithms from the perspectives of time complexity, space com-
                                    and HDBSCAN algorithms from the perspectives of time complexity, space complexity,
                                     plexity, silhouette coefficient and cluster view.
                                    silhouette coefficient and cluster view.
                                     6.1. Time Complexity
                                    6.1. Time Complexity
                                         The time complexity of an algorithm is a function that qualitatively describes the al-
                                         The time
                                    gorithm’s  running    time and isofalso
                                                       complexity         anan algorithm       a function
                                                                                            is measure
                                                                                 indicator to                   that qualitatively
                                                                                                                          required todescribes
                                                                                                           the workload                 exe-       the
                                    algorithm’s     running    time    and  is  also an  indicator    to   measure     the
                                    cute the algorithm. DBSCAN searches for clusters by checking the neighborhood of each  workload      required   to
                                    execute  the   algorithm.    DBSCAN      searches   for  clusters   by   checking   the neighborhood
                                    point ( eps ) in the dataset. When the number of points in a certain point’s neighborhood                  of each
                                    point         in the
                                           (eps)than
                                    is greater            dataset.
                                                        mpts         When
                                                             , a cluster     thethis
                                                                          with     number
                                                                                     point asof the  coreinisacreated.
                                                                                                points           certain Then
                                                                                                                         point’s   neighborhood
                                                                                                                                continue  to         is
                                    greater  than   mpts,   a cluster   with   this point  as  the  core    is created.  Then
                                    iterate and gather other clusters directly density-reachable from this cluster, and stop     continue   to iterate
                                    and
                                    when   no newother
                                         gather           clusters
                                                     points  are added   to anydensity-reachable
                                                                      directly   cluster. Most of the workfromofthis  cluster,is and
                                                                                                                   DBSCAN             stop when no
                                                                                                                                 to perform
                                    new
                                    regionpoints        added
                                                   areand
                                            queries,             to any cluster.
                                                           the algorithm   scans the Most      the work
                                                                                      entireofdataset  whenofperforming
                                                                                                                 DBSCANregion        queries region
                                                                                                                             is to perform
                                    queries,  and the
                                    on each point.       algorithm
                                                     Therefore,         scans
                                                                  its time      the entire
                                                                           complexity    is O  (8252 ) .when
                                                                                             dataset              performing
                                                                                                         For large              region
                                                                                                                     datasets, this methodqueries on
                                    each
                                     is very  point.    Therefore, its
                                                  time-consuming.       Thetime  complexity
                                                                             K-means    algorithm   is O   8252 k. For
                                                                                                        selects            large
                                                                                                                      points      datasets,
                                                                                                                               randomly     as this
                                                                                                                                                 cluster method is
                                    very     time-consuming.          The   K-means     algorithm        selects   k points   randomly
                                     centers, and calculates the distance between each point and center. Re-divide the center centers,      as   cluster
                                     pointcalculates
                                    and        so that thethesum  distance   between
                                                                    of the distances     each point
                                                                                      between              and center.
                                                                                                    all samples     and thisRe-divide
                                                                                                                              point is thethesmallest.
                                                                                                                                                center point so
                                     The time complexity of K-means is O(nkt ) . Among them, n represents the number ofThe time
                                    that    the    sum   of  the   distances   between     all  samples       and    this point   is the  smallest.
                                    complexity
                                     samples, k of         K-means
                                                        represents          O(nkt).ofAmong
                                                                      theisnumber                     and t n represents
                                                                                         clusters,them,          representsthe       number
                                                                                                                                thenumber      of of    samples, k
                                                                                                                                                    itera-
                                    represents
                                     tions [59]. For  thethe
                                                           number
                                                               “PDIA-SL”of clusters,         t represents
                                                                                      andalgorithm’s
                                                                             dataset, the                   timethe   number of
                                                                                                                   complexity        O(825 × 9 × 5)
                                                                                                                                 is iterations       [59].
                                                                                                                                                        . For the
                                    “PDIA-SL”          dataset,process
                                             The calculation       the algorithm’s
                                                                           of HDBSCAN  timeiscomplexity
                                                                                                 highly complex, is O(so  we×only
                                                                                                                                9 × analyze
                                                                                                                        825          5).        several
                                     vital The
                                             stepscalculation       process
                                                     of traversal search      ofiteration.
                                                                            and  HDBSCAN    When    isexecuting     the K-NNso
                                                                                                       highly complex,            we only
                                                                                                                                query  of n analyze
                                                                                                                                                 points, several
                                     each steps
                                    vital     object of
                                                      hastraversal
                                                           to traverse   the Euclidean
                                                                       search             distance
                                                                               and iteration.           calculation,
                                                                                                     When              and the
                                                                                                               executing          K-NN
                                                                                                                             thetime       query ofisn points,
                                                                                                                                       complexity
                                      O ( n 2 object
                                    each      ) . By using
                                                       has to      Prim algorithm
                                                              thetraverse            to realize
                                                                            the Euclidean           the search
                                                                                                distance           based on the
                                                                                                              calculation,     anddataset,
                                                                                                                                     the time thecomplexity
                                                                                                                                                     MST          is
                                    O  (n2be
                                     can      ). By  using theinPrim
                                                  constructed        O(n2algorithm
                                                                           + m) time to    realize thewhere
                                                                                        complexity,         searchmbasedis theon  the weight
                                                                                                                                edge   dataset,ofthe   theMST can
                                    be constructed in O(n2 + m) time complexity,              n ( n − 1) where m is the edge weight of the mutual
                                     mutual reachability graph. In this case, m n=(n−1) , so the time complexity is O(n2 + m) .
                                    reachability graph. In this case, m =                          2 , so the time complexity is O(n2 + m). In the
                                                                                              2
                                     In  the    process   of identifying   and  sorting
                                    process of identifying and sorting − 1 edges,          n − 1    edges,thethe  timecomplexity
                                                                                                               time     complexity is is OO((nn ⋅·log
                                                                                                                                                   logn)n.). As the
                                    MST reduced to smaller subcomponents, the clusters are relabeled, and the time complexity
                                    of this process is O(n2 ). In general, the total time complexity of the algorithm is O(n2 ),
                                    namely O 8252 .
Mathematics 2023, 11, 1539                                                                                                                  25 of 29




                                  6.2. Space Complexity
                                       Space complexity measures the storage space temporarily occupied by the algorithm
                                  during operation. Compared with its high time complexity, the space complexity of DB-
                                  SCAN is only O(825). Each point only needs to maintain a small amount of data informa-
                                  tion (cluster label and point identity). The space complexity of K-means is O((n + k ) · m),
                                  and m represents the dimension [60]. It can be understood that the data information and
                                  center points need to be stored, and the space complexity is O((825 + 9) × 2).
                                       In terms of main storage requirements, the HDBSCAN algorithm requires the space
                                  complexity of O(n) to store datasets. Mutual reachability graph does not need to be
                                  explicitly calculated, and it only needs to store the edge weights of the MST, which requires
                                  space complexity of O(n). Furthermore, only the processing hierarchy needs to be stored
                                  in time, which requires space complexity of O(n). Therefore, the overall space complexity
                                  of the algorithm is O(825).

                                  6.3. Silhouette Coefficient
                                       The silhouette coefficient is an index to evaluate the clustering effect. It combines the
                                  two factors of cohesion and separation and can be used to evaluate the impact of different
                                  algorithms or different operating modes of algorithms on the clustering results. For a
                                  certain point i in the dataset, the formula of the silhouette coefficient of the point i is

                                                                                         b (i ) − a (i )
                                                                            S (i ) =                                                           (29)
                                                                                       max{ a(i ), b(i )}

                                  where a(i ) is the average Euclidean distance from a point i to other points in the same
                                  cluster, and b(i ) is the average Euclidean distance from the point i to all points not in the
                                  same cluster. When there is only one point in the cluster, we define the silhouette coefficient
                                  S(i ) as 0. The mean S(i ) of all samples is called the silhouette coefficient of the clustering
                                  result, and the value of this coefficient should be between [−1, 1]. The larger the value is,
                                  the better the clustering effect is [61]. According to the calculation, the silhouette coefficients
                                  of HDBSCAN, DBSCAN and K-means are 0.6043, 0.3378 and 0.5488, respectively.

                                  6.4. Cluster View
                                                The cluster view of HDBSCAN is shown in Figure 14, and a total of 16 types of clusters
                                          are formed by polymerization. For the “PDIA-SL” dataset in the Pudong International
                                          Airport case, DBSCAN and K-means clustering generate 8 and 9 clusters respectively, as
                                          shown in Figure 19a,b. The number of clusters obtained by HDBSCAN is much larger than
                                           PEER of
               Mathematics 2023, 11, x FORthat     DBSCAN and K-means, and it can organize more alternative schemes
                                                REVIEW                                                             29 of 33 in terms of
                                          station layout.




                                  Figure Figure 19. Clustering
                                         19. Clustering        results:(a)
                                                            results:        DBSCAN analysis
                                                                        (a) DBSCAN          on the
                                                                                     analysis    on“PDIA-SL” dataset; (b)
                                                                                                    the “PDIA-SL”         K-means
                                                                                                                       dataset;   analysis
                                                                                                                                (b) K-means analysis
                                         on the “PDIA-SL” dataset.
                                  on the “PDIA-SL” dataset.
                                              In summary, we can obtain the analysis performance and results of the three algo-
                                         rithms DBSCAN, K-means and HDBSCAN on the “PDIA-SL” dataset, and we list these
                                         results in Table 3 for comparison.

                                         Table 3. Comparison of clustering results of DBSCAN, K-means and HDBSCAN.
Mathematics 2023, 11, 1539                                                                                            26 of 29




                                  In summary, we can obtain the analysis performance and results of the three algorithms
                             DBSCAN, K-means and HDBSCAN on the “PDIA-SL” dataset, and we list these results in
                             Table 3 for comparison.

                             Table 3. Comparison of clustering results of DBSCAN, K-means and HDBSCAN.

                                                     Time                Space            Silhouette          Number
                                 Algorithm
                                                   Complexity          Complexity         Coefficient        of Clusters
                                 DBSCAN              O(68025)            O(825)             0.3378                8
                                  K-means            O(37125)            O(1668)            0.5488               9
                                 HDBSCAN             O(68025)            O(825)             0.6043               16


                             7. Conclusions
                                  To more scientifically and rationally plan the station layout and route selection in
                             the southwest of Pudong International Airport, this paper optimizes from station spacing,
                             location and geospatial optimization.
                                  In the process of station spacing optimization, this paper comprehensively considers
                             the factors such as the construction cost, operating cost, social benefits, travel time cost and
                             value-added land development along the Metro line. This paper thoroughly investigates
                             the various data required for calculating the influencing factors and establishes a relatively
                             complete cost-oriented optimization model of station spacing. The optimal station spacing
                             is 683.6 m, which is greater than the station spacing of buses and avoids the waste of public
                             transportation resources.
                                  In the process of location optimization, this paper analyzes the factors that affect
                             the layout of urban rail transit stations, including urban scale, economy, form and land
                             use patterns, passenger flow distribution, and geographical environment. This paper
                             introduces the principle and calculation process of the HDBSCAN algorithm in detail
                             and uses HDBSCAN to analyze the “PDIA-SL” dataset. The position of the ideal points
                             was obtained by clustering, and the ideal location of the station selection was obtained
                             by fitting the centroid of the clusters. At the same time, this paper uses the DBSCAN
                             algorithm and K-means to analyze the dataset “PDIA-SL”, and compares the analysis
                             results with HDBSCAN. Through the calculation, the time complexities of DBSCAN, K-
                             means and HDBSCAN are O(68025), O(37125) and O(68025). The space complexities are
                             O(825), O(1668) and O(825). The silhouette coefficients are 0.3378, 0.5488 and 0.6043. The
                             HDBSCAN algorithm has obvious advantages regarding space complexity and silhouette
                             coefficient. Meanwhile, the cluster view of HDBSCAN displays 16 clusters, which can
                             organize more alternative schemes.
                                  In the process of geospatial optimization, this paper draws the distribution of POI,
                             land use types and elevation map of 12.5 m DEM of the Pudong New Area. This paper
                             considers setting the station selection at about 300 m away from residential, commercial,
                             factorial buildings and large stadiums, and avoiding groundwater, cultivated land, and
                             wetlands as much as possible. In this paper, the station is set up at the road intersection
                             as much as possible to attract passenger flow and facilitate the transfer between the buses
                             and subways.
                                  These optimization results can help urban planners and decision-makers understand
                             the influence of various factors in station spacing optimization and location optimiza-
                             tion. We can also realize the good clustering performance of the HDBSCAN algorithm
                             in urban rail transit planning. The five routing schemes proposed in this paper are well
                             integrated with these optimization results. They can provide a basis for a new round of
                             urban rail transit development in the southwest direction of Pudong International Airport.
                             These routing schemes aim to improve the expected benefits of passenger flow to Pudong
                             International Airport.
                                  Through the case study of Pudong International Airport, we want to apply the method
                             to a more general situation. According to the practical experience of urban development at
                             home and abroad, the planar geometric schemes of the urban arterial road network can
Mathematics 2023, 11, 1539                                                                                                                27 of 29




                                    be summarized into five types: square grid, ring and radial, freestyle, mixed and group.
                                    The road network of square grid is the most common type, whose traffic organization is
                                    simple and road capacity is enormous; the ring and radial road network is convenient
                                    for the rapid connection between the city center and the suburbs, which is often used in
                                    megacities; the freestyle road system can better cope with complex terrain. The road system
                                    of Shanghai is composed of the above three basic schemas and cities like Shanghai also
                                    include Beijing, Changchun, Nanjing and Hefei in China. The research method of station
                                    layout, which integrates station spacing, ideal location and spatial analysis optimization,
                                    can provide a reference for developing rail transit in these metropolises. In addition, the
                                    limitation of this paper is mainly the spatial dependence and heterogeneity of geographic
                                    data information, which leads to the conclusions drawn in this paper only applicable to
                                    above-mentioned specific types of cities. In addition, the direction of future improvement
                                    may lie in the analysis of whether it can be applied to other traffic issues: Can we use this
                                    method to analyze the relationship between traffic flow and signal lights, and optimize
                                    signal light placement? Can we use this method to analyze the relationship between
                                    conveying efficiency and highway entrances and exits, and optimize the layout of entrances
                                    and exits?

                                    Author Contributions: Conceptualization, M.P. and P.Y.; methodology, P.Y.; software, P.Y.; validation,
                                    P.Y.; formal analysis, P.Y.; investigation, P.Y.; resources, M.P.; data curation, M.P.; writing—original
                                    draft preparation, P.Y.; writing—review and editing, M.P.; visualization, P.Y. All authors have read
                                    and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
                                    Funding: This research received no external funding.
                                    Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
                                    Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
                                    Data Availability Statement: All data, models or code generated or used during the study are
                                    available from the authors upon request.
                                    Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest in the publication of
                                    this paper.

References
1.    Cheng, J.; Yin, P. Analysis of the Complex Network of the Urban Function under the Lockdown of COVID-19: Evidence from
      Shenzhen in China. Mathematics 2022, 10, 2412. [CrossRef]
2.    Li, S.; Zhou, Y.; Kundu, T.; Sheu, J.B. Spatiotemporal variation of the worldwide air transportation network induced by COVID-19
      pandemic in 2020. Transp. Policy 2021, 111, 168–184. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.    Liu, M.B.; Liao, S.M. A case study on the underground rapid transport system (URTS) for the international airport hubs: Planning,
      application and lessons learnt. Tunn. Undergr. Space Technol. 2018, 80, 114–122. [CrossRef]
4.    Cheng, J.; Xie, Y.; Zhang, J. Industry structure optimization via the complex network of industry space: A case study of Jiangxi
      Province in China. J. Clean. Prod. 2022, 338, 130602. [CrossRef]
5.    Mohaymany, A.S.; Gholami, A. Multimodal feeder network design problem: Ant colony optimization approach. J. Transp. Eng.
      2010, 136, 323–331. [CrossRef]
6.    Lai, X. Optimization of Station Locations and Track Alignments for Rail Transit Lines; UMI: London, UK, 2012; pp. 87–120.
7.    Saidi, S.; Wirasinghe, S.C.; Kattan, L. Long-term planning for ring-radial urban rail transit networks. Transp. Res. Part B Methodol.
      2016, 86, 128–146. [CrossRef]
8.    Lv, Z.; He, D.; Jia, H.F.; Li, C.B. Research on the Layout of the Integrative Urban Rail Transit Line Station; Trans Tech Publications Ltd.:
      Zurich, Switzerland, 2013; pp. 1222–1229.
9.    Chai, S.; Liang, Q.; Zhong, S. Design of urban rail transit network constrained by urban road network, trips and land-use
      characteristics. Sustainability 2019, 11, 6128. [CrossRef]
10.   Xu, H.; Qiu, Z.; Yuan, H. Research on the Location of Urban Rail Transit Station based on the Integration of Land Use Layout and
      Regional Transportation Network. In Proceedings of the 2021 6th International Conference on Transportation Information and
      Safety (ICTIS), Wuhan, China, 22–24 October 2021.
11.   Xia, S.; Peng, D.; Meng, D.; Zhang, C.; Wang, G.; Giem, E.; Chen, Z. A fast adaptive k-means with no bounds. IEEE Trans. Pattern
      Anal. Mach. Intell. 2020, 44, 87–99. [CrossRef]
12.   Jian, S.; Pang, G.; Cao, L.; Lu, K.; Gao, H. Cure: Flexible categorical data representation by hierarchical coupling learning. IEEE
      Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 2018, 31, 853–866. [CrossRef]
Mathematics 2023, 11, 1539                                                                                                        28 of 29




13.   Yin, P.; Cheng, J.; Peng, M. Analyzing the Passenger Flow of Urban Rail Transit Stations by Using Entropy Weight-Grey Correlation
      Model: A Case Study of Shanghai in China. Mathematics 2022, 10, 3506. [CrossRef]
14.   Li, M.X.; Wang, X.Q. Data analysis of blast furnace gas center based on STING grid clustering. Mater. Sci. Eng. 2018, 439, 032017.
      [CrossRef]
15.   Khan, K.; Rehman, S.U.; Aziz, K.; Fong, S.; Sarasvady, S. DBSCAN: Past, present and future. In Proceedings of the Fifth
      International Conference on the Applications of Digital Information and Web Technologies (ICADIWT 2014), Bangalore, India,
      17–19 February 2014.
16.   McInnes, L.; Healy, J.; Astels, S. hdbscan: Hierarchical density based clustering. J. Open Source Softw. 2017, 2, 205. [CrossRef]
17.   Melvin, R.L.; Xiao, J.; Godwin, R.C.; Berenhaut, K.S.; Salsbury, F.R. Visualizing correlated motion with HDBSCAN clustering.
      Protein Sci. 2018, 27, 62–75. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18.   Ghamarian, I.; Marquis, E.A. Hierarchical density-based cluster analysis framework for atom probe tomography data. Ultrami-
      croscopy 2019, 200, 28–38. [CrossRef]
19.   Wang, L.; Chen, P.; Chen, L.; Mou, J. Ship AIS trajectory clustering: An HDBSCAN-based approach. J. Mar. Sci. Eng. 2021, 9, 566.
      [CrossRef]
20.   Liu, P.; Yao, H.; Dai, H.; Fu, W. The Detection and Following of Human Legs Based on Feature Optimized HDBSCAN for Mobile
      Robot. J. Phys. 2022, 2216, 012009. [CrossRef]
21.   Givoni, M.; Chen, X. Airline and railway disintegration in China: The case of Shanghai Hongqiao Integrated Transport Hub.
      Transp. Lett. 2017, 9, 202–214. [CrossRef]
22.   Chang, Y.C. Factors affecting airport access mode choice for elderly air passengers. Transp. Res. Part E Logist. Transp. Rev. 2013,
      57, 105–112. [CrossRef]
23.   Aqib, M.; Mehmood, R.; Alzahrani, A.; Katib, I.; Albeshri, A.; Altowaijri, S.M. Rapid transit systems: Smarter urban planning
      using big data, in-memory computing, deep learning, and GPUs. Sustainability 2019, 11, 2736. [CrossRef]
24.   Jiao, L.; Shen, L.; Shuai, C.; Tan, Y.; He, B. Measuring crowdedness between adjacent stations in an urban metro system: A chinese
      case study. Sustainability 2017, 9, 2325. [CrossRef]
25.   Wu, S.S.; Cheng, J.; Lo, S.M.; Chen, C.C.; Bai, Y. Coordinating urban construction and district-level population density for
      balanced development: An explorative structural equation modeling analysis on Shanghai. J. Clean. Prod. 2021, 312, 127646.
      [CrossRef]
26.   Caparros-Midwood, D.; Barr, S.; Dawson, R. Optimised spatial planning to meet long term urban sustainability objectives.
      Computers. Environ. Urban Syst. 2015, 54, 154–164. [CrossRef]
27.   Arbex, R.O.; da Cunha, C.B. Efficient transit network design and frequencies setting multi-objective optimization by alternating
      objective genetic algorithm. Transp. Res. Part B Methodol. 2015, 81, 355–376. [CrossRef]
28.   Liu, B.; Sun, S.; Mu, R. Performance Evaluation of Railway Logistics Based on the Layers of Entropy and Grey Correlation Degrees.
      In Proceedings of the International Conference of Logistics Engineering & Management, Shanghai, China, 9–11 October 2014.
29.   Zheng, J. The Relationship Between Property Value and Urban Rapid Rail Transit: Based on Improved Hedonic Price Model.
      Ph.D. Thesis, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, 2004.
30.   Cheng, J. Analyzing the factors influencing the choice of the government on leasing different types of land uses: Evidence from
      Shanghai of China. Land Use Policy 2020, 90, 104303. [CrossRef]
31.   Cheng, J. Data analysis of the factors influencing the industrial land leasing in Shanghai based on mathematical models. Math.
      Probl. Eng. 2020, 2020, 1–11. [CrossRef]
32.   Lee, B.; Gordon, P.; Moore, J.E.; Richardson, H.W. The attributes of residence/workplace areas and transit commuting. J. Transp.
      Land Use 2011, 4, 43–63. [CrossRef]
33.   Cheng, J.; Xie, Y.; Zhang, J. Analyzing the Urban Hierarchical Structure Based on Multiple Indicators of Economy and Industry:
      An Econometric Study in China. CMES Comput. Model. Eng. Sci. 2022, 131, 1831–1855. [CrossRef]
34.   Cooper, C.H.; Harvey, I.; Orford, S.; Chiaradia, A.J. Using multiple hybrid spatial design network analysis to predict longitudinal
      effect of a major city centre redevelopment on pedestrian flows. Transportation 2021, 48, 643–672. [CrossRef]
35.   Qiang, H.; Hu, L. Population and capital flows in metropolitan Beijing, China: Empirical evidence from the past 30 years. Cities
      2022, 120, 103464. [CrossRef]
36.   Zornoza-Gallego, C. Means of Transport and Population Distribution in Metropolitan Areas: An Evolutionary Analysis of the
      Valencia Metropolitan Area. Land 2022, 11, 657. [CrossRef]
37.   Cheng, J. Analysis of commercial land leasing of the district governments of Beijing in China. Land Use Policy 2021, 100, 104881.
      [CrossRef]
38.   Cheng, J. Residential land leasing and price under public land ownership. J. Urban Plan. Dev. 2021, 147, 05021009. [CrossRef]
39.   Cheng, J.; Luo, X. Analyzing the Land Leasing Behavior of the Government of Beijing, China, via the Multinomial Logit Model.
      Land 2022, 11, 376. [CrossRef]
40.   Cheng, J. Analysis of the factors influencing industrial land leasing in Beijing of China based on the district-level data. Land Use
      Policy 2022, 122, 106389. [CrossRef]
41.   Caros, N.S.; Guo, X.; Stewart, A.; Attanucci, J.; Smith, N.; Nioras, D.; Zimmer, A. Ridership and Operations Visualization
      Engine: An Integrated Transit Performance and Passenger Journey Visualization Engine. Transp. Res. Rec. 2023, 2677, 1082–1097.
      [CrossRef]
Mathematics 2023, 11, 1539                                                                                                          29 of 29




42.   Cheng, J. Mathematical models and data analysis of residential land leasing behavior of district governments of Beijing in China.
      Mathematics 2021, 9, 2314. [CrossRef]
43.   Zou, Y.; Wang, L.; Xue, Z.; Jiang, M.; Lu, X.; Yang, S.; Yu, X. Impacts of agricultural and reclamation practices on wetlands in the
      Amur River Basin, Northeastern China. Wetlands 2018, 38, 383–389. [CrossRef]
44.   Susilo, Y.O.; Dijst, M. How Far is Too Far? Travel time ratios for activity participation in the Netherlands. Transp. Res. Rec. 2009,
      2134, 89–98. [CrossRef]
45.   Yiu, C.Y.; Wong, S.K. The effects of expected transport improvements on housing prices. Urban Stud. 2005, 42, 113–125. [CrossRef]
46.   Campello, R.J.; Moulavi, D.; Sander, J. Density-based clustering based on hierarchical density estimates. In Proceedings of the
      Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining: 17th Pacific-Asia Conference, Gold Coast, Australia, 14–17 April 2013.
47.   Ko, K.; Cao, X.J. The impact of Hiawatha Light Rail on commercial and industrial property values in Minneapolis. J. Public Transp.
      2013, 16, 47–66. [CrossRef]
48.   Yin, P.; Cheng, J. A MySQL-based software system of urban land planning database of Shanghai in China. CMES Comput. Model.
      Eng. Sci. 2023, 135, 2387–2405. [CrossRef]
49.   Dette, H.; Wu, W. Detecting relevant changes in the mean of nonstationary processes—A mass excess approach. Ann. Stat. 2019,
      47, 3578–3608. [CrossRef]
50.   Basora, L.; Olive, X.; Dubot, T. Recent advances in anomaly detection methods applied to aviation. Aerospace 2019, 6, 117.
      [CrossRef]
51.   Zheng, S.; Kahn, M.E. Land and residential property markets in a booming economy: New evidence from Beijing. J. Urban Econ.
      2008, 63, 743–757. [CrossRef]
52.   Graham, D.J.; Carbo, J.M.; Anderson, R.J.; Bansal, P. Understanding the costs of urban rail transport operations. Transp. Res. Part
      B Methodol. 2020, 138, 292–316.
53.   Sun, Y.; Shi, J.; Schonfeld, P.M. Identifying passenger flow characteristics and evaluating travel time reliability by visualizing AFC
      data: A case study of Shanghai Metro. Public Transp. 2016, 8, 341–363. [CrossRef]
54.   González-Gil, A.; Palacin, R.; Batty, P.; Powell, J.P. A systems approach to reduce urban rail energy consumption. Energy Convers.
      Manag. 2014, 80, 509–524. [CrossRef]
55.   Guo, S.; Yu, L.; Chen, X.; Zhang, Y. Modelling waiting time for passengers transferring from rail to buses. Transp. Plan. Technol.
      2011, 34, 795–809. [CrossRef]
56.   Cai, J.; Wei, H.; Yang, H.; Zhao, X. A novel clustering algorithm based on DPC and PSO. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 88200–88214.
      [CrossRef]
57.   Kifana, B.D.; Abdurohman, M. Great circle distance methode for improving operational control system based on gps tracking
      system. Int. J. Comput. Sci. Eng. 2012, 4, 647.
58.   Marini, F.; Walczak, B. Particle swarm optimization (PSO). A tutorial. Chemom. Intell. Lab. Syst. 2015, 149, 153–165. [CrossRef]
59.   Pakhira, M.K. A linear time-complexity k-means algorithm using cluster shifting. In Proceedings of the 2014 international
      conference on computational intelligence and communication networks, Bhopal, India, 14–16 November 2014.
60.   Arora, P.; Varshney, S. Analysis of k-means and k-medoids algorithm for big data. Procedia Comput. Sci. 2016, 78, 507–512.
      [CrossRef]
61.   Dinh, D.T.; Fujinami, T.; Huynh, V.N. Estimating the optimal number of clusters in categorical data clustering by silhou-
      ette coefficient. In Proceedings of the Knowledge and Systems Sciences: 20th International Symposium, Da Nang, Vietnam,
      29 November 2019.

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
