                                                  The Impact of Congestion and Dedicated Lanes
                                                     on On-Demand Multimodal Transit Systems
                                                Jason Lu, Anthony Trasatti, Hongzhao Guan, Kevin Dalmeijer, and
                                                                    Pascal Van Hentenryck

                                                  H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering,
                                                                 Georgia Institute of Technology
arXiv:2302.03165v2 [math.OC] 21 Feb 2024




                                                                               February 23, 2024




                                                                                     Abstract

                                           Traffic congestion can have a detrimental effect on public transit systems, and understand-
                                           ing and mitigating these effects is of critical importance for effective public transportation.
                                           Implementing Dedicated Bus Lanes (DBLs) is a well-known intervention to achieve this goal.
                                           A DBL is a designated lane for bus transit, which avoids congestion and substantially lowers
                                           the travel time. This makes transit more attractive, encouraging more travelers to adopt
                                           public transportation. This paper studies the impact of congestion and DBLs on novel On-
                                           Demand Multimodal Transit Systems (ODMTS). ODMTS combine traditional rail and bus
                                           networks with on-demand shuttles. Previous case studies have shown that ODMTS may
                                           simultaneously improve travel time, reduce system cost, and attract new passengers. Those
                                           benefits were shown for an ideal world without traffic congestion, and this paper hypothe-
                                           sizes that the advantages of ODMTS can be even more pronounced in the real world. This
                                           paper explores this hypothesis by creating realistic congestion scenarios and solving bilevel
                                           optimization problems to design ODMTS under these scenarios. The impact of DBLs on
                                           ODMTS is evaluated with a comprehensive case study in the Metro Atlanta Area. The
                                           results show that DBLs can significantly improve travel times and are effective at increasing
                                           adoption of the system.

                                           Keywords: Congestion, Dedicated Bus Lanes, Public Transit, On-Demand Multimodal
                                           Transit Systems.




                                                                                         1
                                                des�na�on




              origin

                   Figure 1: Example ODMTS with Passenger Path (solid lines)


1    Introduction
Traffic congestion can have a detrimental effect on public transit systems, and understanding
and mitigating these effects is of critical importance for effective public transportation. Im-
plementing Dedicated Bus Lanes (DBLs) is a well-known intervention to achieve this goal. A
DBL is a designated lane for bus transit, which avoids congestion and substantially lowers the
travel time for riders. This makes transit more attractive, encouraging more travelers to adopt
public transportation. Increased ridership in turn leads to a plethora of benefits, including fewer
cars on the road, less emission, and increased revenue for transit operators that can be used to
further improve service.
    This paper studies the impact of congestion and DBLs on novel On-Demand Multimodal
Transit Systems (ODMTS). ODMTS combine traditional rail and bus networks with on-demand
shuttles (Van Hentenryck, 2019). Trains and buses serve the busy corridors on a fixed schedule,
while shuttles dynamically serve the first and last miles. Figure 1 provides an example of an
ODMTS and the path of a single passenger. Passengers provide their origin and destination
through a mobile application, after which the ODMTS provides a route to serve them. In this
case, a passenger is picked up by an on-demand shuttle close to their origin and brought to
the train station. The passenger is then instructed to take a train and a bus, which both run
on a fixed schedule. When the passenger arrives at the bus station closest to the destination,
another on-demand shuttle is ready to pick them up and serve the last mile. The Socially Aware
Mobility Lab (2020) provides a video of this process.
    Case studies in Canberra, Australia (Mahéo et al., 2019), Ann Arbor, Michigan (Basciftci
and Van Hentenryck, 2020, 2023; Auad and Van Hentenryck, 2022), and Atlanta, Georgia
(Dalmeijer and Van Hentenryck (2020); Auad et al. (2021); Guan et al. (2022); Van Hentenryck
et al. (2023)) demonstrate that ODMTS may simultaneously improve travel time, reduce system
cost, and attract new passengers compared to the existing systems. Those benefits are shown
for an ideal world without traffic congestion, and this paper hypothesizes that the advantages
of ODMTS can be even more pronounced in the real world. By the very nature of ODMTS,
shuttle trips are inherently local and minimally affected by traffic. Furthermore, buses are only
used to serve high-density corridors, making DBLs for ODMTS potentially more impactful than
for a traditional system.
    A case study is conducted to fill the critical gap in understanding the impact of congestion
on ODMTS. Furthermore, it is shown that DBLs may lead to significantly increased rider


                                                2
 Figure 2: Average Traffic Volume along I-85 during the 7am-9am Rush Hour (March 21-25, 2022)

                                             Full segment    Highlighted segment
              Distance                       28.8 miles      12.0 miles
              Rush hour time (7am-9am)       28-85 min       12-50 min
              Free flow time (2am)           24 min          10 min
              Potential savings              4-61 min        2-40 min

             Table 1: Travel Times and Potential Savings on I-85 (March 21-25, 2022)


adoption. The case study focuses on traffic from Gwinnett Country to the city of Atlanta, both
in the Metro Atlanta Area (Georgia, USA). Gwinnett County is the second-most populated
county in Georgia, with close to a million residents (U.S. Census Bureau, 2021). Many of
these residents work in Atlanta and drive the Interstate 85 (I-85) for their commute, creating
significant traffic. Figure 2 summarizes Average Traffic Volume (ATV) from continuous count
stations along I-85 (Georgia Department of Transportation, 2022). When driving south from
Gwinnett to Atlanta, the ATV more than doubles on the highlighted section, which shows the
importance of this highway and the high potential for congestion. Table 1 uses data from Google
Maps to demonstrates the enormous potential of DBLs to reduce travel time on I-85. The table
compares rush hour travel time to free flow travel time for both the full segment and for the
highlighted segment. It can be seen that a DBL may save commuters from Gwinnett up to 61
minutes every morning.
   The impact of DBLs is studied by creating different congestion scenarios and designing

                                               3
ODMTS with and without DBLs. Designing the optimal ODMTS is modeled as a bilevel
optimization problem in which passengers choose whether to adopt the system based on the
quality of the trip they are offered. This work combines the general model by Auad et al. (2021)
with the adoption model by Basciftci and Van Hentenryck (2023). To solve this model at the
scale of the case study, this paper applies the heuristic algorithm by Guan et al. (2022) and uses
Benders decomposition to solve the fixed-demand ODMTS design problem in every iteration.
This enables a comprehensive case study in the Metro Atlanta Area that considers different
levels of congestion, shows the impact of DBLs, and demonstrates the increase in adoption of
the ODMTS.
    The contributions of the paper can be summarized as follows:

    1. The paper creates realistic congestion scenarios and solves bilevel optimization problems
      to design ODMTS under these scenarios.

    2. The paper evaluates the effect of congestion on ODMTS with a comprehensive case study
      in the Metro Atlanta Area.

    3. The paper demonstrates on the case study that DBLs can significantly increase ODMTS
      adoption.

    The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 gives an overview of the
literature. Section 3 presents the methods for generating congestion scenarios and designing
ODMTS with and without DBLs. Section 4 introduces the case study area and the experimental
settings. The effect of congestion on ODMTS without DBLs is analyzed in Section 5, after which
Section 6 analyzes the effect of adding DBLs to the system. Section 7 concludes the study with
final thoughts on DBLs in ODMTS.


2     Literature Review
DBLs have been studied through a variety of simulations and case studies. Basso et al. (2011)
analyse a model where travelers have the choice between car, bus, and an outside option. The
authors optimize frequency, vehicle size, spacing between stops, and capacity on DBLs to study
different urban congestion management policies. It is found that implementing DBLs is a better
stand-alone policy than subsidizing transit or pricing congestion. Russo et al. (2022) study the
welfare effect of DBLs in Rome, Italy and conclude that DBLs may decrease bus travel time by
18%, decrease waiting time by 12%, and increase ridership by 26%. Furthermore, travel time
for other motor vehicles may improve as well. Other case studies include the study by Ben-Dor
et al. (2018) for Sioux Falls, South Dakota. The authors present an agent-based model and
use the MATSim simulator to demonstrate that DBLs fundamentally improve the effectiveness
of public transit and essentially make public transit trip durations similar during peak hours
and non-peak hours. Hoonsiri et al. (2021) consider an intervention where fixed buses are
allowed onto dedicated Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) lanes. A case study on the Rama 3 road in
Bangkok, Thailand shows potential savings in travel time and a reduction in greenhouse gas
emissions. Tsitsokas et al. (2021) formulate a nonlinear combinatorial optimization model to


                                                4
solve a DBL allocation problem on a large-scale road network. A case study in the San Francisco
Metropolitan area demonstrates that the road network with DBL configurations significantly
improves travel times for both cars and bus users compared to no DBLs.
   Dedicated lanes have also been studied in the context of Autonomous Vehicles (AVs), where
similar benefits are observed. Chakraborty et al. (2021) consider the problem of deciding which
lanes on a freeway network should be AV-exclusive. Traveler choice between AVs and regular
vehicles is captured by a logit model, and the resulting non-convex mixed-integer nonlinear pro-
gram is solved through a combination of Benders decomposition and the Method of Successive
Averages. The authors construct multiple freeway networks with up to 23 links to demonstrate
the algorithm. Chen et al. (2020) explore the idea of giving AVs access to dedicated BRT lanes
and focus on the interaction between AVs and BRTs. The authors first consider a model for
mixed-use lanes, and propose a sequential optimization method to analyze the performance.
The second model allows AVs to move in and out of the BRT lane at different locations, and is
solved through successive linear programming. A case study for BRT Line 1 in Beijing, China
shows that mixed-use lanes can both improve efficiency of AVs and reduce congestion on the
other lanes.
   The ODMTS concept was proposed by Mahéo et al. (2019). They leverage ideas from hub arc
location problems for transportation and telecommunication networks (Campbell et al., 2005) to
design a hub and shuttle transit system that determines which bus arcs to open and how to serve
the first/last miles with shuttles. A Benders decomposition algorithm is introduced to solve the
problem, and a case study in Canberra, Australia demonstrates that the new system improves
transit times without negatively affecting system costs. Auad et al. (2021) build on this work
to present an end-to-end ODMTS solution that combines demand estimation, network design,
fleet sizing, and real-time shuttle dispatching. Earlier methods are adapted to the multimodal
setting, and practical constraints are introduced, such as a limit on the numbers of passenger
transfers. The pipeline is used to conduct a case study in Atlanta, Georgia and to demonstrate
the resiliency of ODMTS under various scenarios of COVID-19 pandemic response.
   Recent studies on ODMTS have focused on including latent demand into the design of the
network. Basciftci and Van Hentenryck (2020, 2023) study ODMTS Design with Adoptions
(ODMTS-DA) with bilevel optimization models. The ODMTS-DA aims to design an ODMTS
while taking into account that new passengers may adapt the system based on a personalized
choice model. Exact methods are introduced to solve the ODMTS-DA, and a small-scale case
study in Ann Arbor, Michigan demonstrates that ODMTS can improve service for the exist-
ing riders and attract new riders at the same time. Guan et al. (2022) develop heuristics to
solve the ODMTS-DA for large-scale systems to which the exact method does not scale. These
heuristics solve the problem iteratively by solving an ODMTS design problem with fixed de-
mand, evaluating the passenger choices based on the new network, updating the ODMTS design
problem, and repeating this process until convergence. A case study in Atlanta, Georgia is used
to demonstrate that the heuristic is able to find high-quality solutions in significantly less time
than the exact algorithm.
   Other studies have investigated the coordination between on-demand services and public
transit systems. Salazar et al. (2018) develop a network flow model and a pricing scheme to


                                                5
capture the interaction of Autonomous Mobility-on-Demand (AMoD) fleets with public transit.
They undertake a case study on the existing transit system in New York City and show that
integrating AMoD fleets with public transit brings significant benefits compared to AMoD fleets
operating independently. Pinto et al. (2020) study the allocation of resources between transit
systems and shared-use autonomous mobility services. They design a bilevel mathematical pro-
gramming formulation that decides the balance between open bus routes and fleet sizes. Their
case study in Chicago demonstrates significant benefits to passenger waiting times compared to
the existing multimodal transit network.
    The current paper studies whether the advantages of DBLs translate to ODMTS. Previous
works on DBLs either study the effect of policy changes on existing systems or optimize how to
modify existing systems. This paper leverage the fact that ODMTS is a novel type of transit
system to introduce models that take congestion into account while designing the system. It also
presents a case study for a large multi-modal system, while related optimization-based studies
often focus on a single mode and a single corridor.


3     Methodology
This section introduces the methods that are needed to rigorously study the effect of congestion
on ODMTS and to assess the benefit of DBLs. It first proposes an approach to model congestion
in ODMTS with limited resources, and how to create the congestion scenarios that are used in
the analysis. It then presents a bilevel optimization model to design ODMTS for these scenarios.
It concludes by discussing how to incorporate DBLs into the design.

3.1   Congestion Modeling
Obtaining travel time predictions for various levels of congestion for each rider becomes com-
putationally challenging or financially expensive for a large ridership. Therefore, this paper
constructs congestion scenarios in two steps. The first step is to obtain a basis of travel times,
and the second step is to multiply the travel time basis with a factor that depends on the
congestion scenario and the local conditions.

Step 1: Travel Time Basis        The travel time basis serves as the default travel time for any
origin-destination pair (OD pair) in this study. For a given congestion scenario, the travel
time basis is multiplied by a congestion scaling factor, resulting in the travel times under
that scenario. The travel time basis is obtained from the POLARIS Transportation System
Simulation Tool (Auld et al., 2016). POLARIS is an agent-based modeling software tool created
by Argonne National Laboratory that uses a dynamic simulation of travel demand, network
supply, and network operations. It is used for a variety of cities to simulate an average day
of activities, and has been tuned specifically for Atlanta using survey data from the Atlanta
Regional Commission (Atlanta Regional Commission, 2022). POLARIS provides travel times
between every pair of Traffic Analysis Zones (TAZs). The travel time between arbitrary points
is approximated by the travel time between the corresponding TAZs. POLARIS does model



                                                6
Figure 3: Query Reference Locations with Respect to the Case Study Area (Gray) and Gwinnett
County (Purple)


congestion, but tuning to the survey data only provides a single scenario. This motivates the
next step.

Step 2: Congestion Scaling Factors To determine an appropriate congestion scaling factor
for every OD pair (without querying all of them), this paper introduces a set Q of Query
Reference Locations (QRL). The set Q is shown by Figure 3, and consists of existing Gwinnett
bus stops, MARTA rail stations, and local points of interest in Gwinnett. For a given OD pair
and a scenario k, the idea is to first identify the reference location i ∈ Q closest to the origin
                                                                     k is then calculated as
and j ∈ Q closest to the destination. The congestion scaling factor Rij
τijk /τij0 , where the travel time τijk for scenario k is queried and τij0 is from the travel time basis in
Step 1. The estimated travel time for the OD pair under scenario k is obtained by multiplying
                             k . The benefit of this approach is that it allows for region-specific
the OD travel time basis by Rij
scaling but only queries travel times between the QRLs, which avoids prohibitively expensive
data collection. In the case where i = j, i.e., the origin and the destination are mapped to the
same QRL, the scaling factor is calculated between i and the QRL closest to i.

Scenarios     The baseline scenario k = 0 is provided by the POLARIS travel time basis. To
generate the congestion scenarios, this paper uses the Directions API on Google Maps Plat-
form (2022) to obtain scaling factors for different levels of congestion. The Directions API
supports two traffic models: best guess and pessimistic, which approximate travel times


                                                    7
under congestion. Based on these traffic models, three congestion scenarios are created:

   • Expected: use best guess travel times.
   • 50-50: use the average of best guess and pessimistic travel times.
   • Pessimistic: use pessimistic travel times.

The corresponding travel times τijexp , τij50 , and τijpes are queried between all i, j ∈ Q. Then the
                 exp    50 , and Rpes between all i, j ∈ Q are calculated accordingly and define
scaling factors Rij  , Rij        ij
the scenarios.

3.2   ODMTS Design
This paper combines the general model by Auad et al. (2021) with the adoption model by
Basciftci and Van Hentenryck (2023) to design an ODMTS that takes passenger adoption into
account. The resulting bilevel model inherits support for transfer constraints, multiple frequen-
cies, and both bus and rail connections. A full description is included below to clarify the
assumptions and make the paper more self-contained. A more implicit description of a similar
model can be found in Guan et al. (2022).

Problem Description         In the general model from Auad et al. (2021), the first input to the
ODMTS network design problem is a transit network modeled by the directed multigraph
G = (V, A). Vertices V represent locations, and arcs a ∈ A capture potential methods of
transportation between these locations. Every arc from i(a) ∈ V to j(a) ∈ V is associated with
a mode m(a) ∈ {shuttle, bus, rail} that indicates how this connection is served, and bus and
rail arcs additionally have a frequency f (a) from the set F bus or F rail respectively. Bus and
rail arcs are used to transport riders between a set of transit hubs VH ⊆ V , while shuttle arcs
provide the connections to and from the hub network. For example, arc a ∈ A may correspond
to opening a bus connection with frequency 10 per hour between hub i ∈ VH and hub j ∈ VH .
It is important to note that G may have parallel arcs that model the same connection, but
differ in mode or frequency. This is the case when a bus service can be offered at different
frequencies, for example. The network design problem decides which potential arcs a ∈ A to
make available. In line with earlier work it is assumed that shuttle connections and the fixed
rail network are always available, and the model only decides whether or not to open each bus
arc (Auad et al., 2021; Guan et al., 2022). Furthermore, bus and rail capacities are ignored,
as the high-frequency vehicles are almost never full in practice (Auad et al., 2021). Shuttle
capacities are captured implicitly: the cost of using a shuttle represents the average cost for
serving passengers in a ridesharing system with small vehicles. For convenience, the set of bus
arcs is denoted by Abus . Finally, every arc a ∈ A is associated with a distance da , a travel time
τa , and an expected waiting time ωa . For shuttles and buses the travel time is based on the
congestion scenario (as discussed in Section 3.1), while for rail the travel time approximates the
current schedule.
   The second input to the network design problem is a set T of passenger trips. Each trip
t ∈ T is an OD pair with origin o(t) ∈ V and destination d(t) ∈ V , and is associated with
p(t) number of travelers. Capturing latent demand is essential when designing public transit


                                                 8
services, as omitting these potential riders may cause inefficiencies and unfairness (Basciftci and
Van Hentenryck, 2023). For this reason, the set T consists of both potential riders (i.e., latent
demand) T ′ ⊆ T who will only adopt the ODMTS if their travel time is sufficiently short, and
existing riders T \ T ′ who will always adopt the ODMTS. This study assumes existing riders
have no alternative travel options, because they are already transit users. This behavior is
captured by a choice function C t that will be defined later. A trip that is served by the ODMTS
is modeled as a path in G from o(t) to d(t). To prevent a large number of transfers, these paths
are limited to at most K ≥ 1 arcs.
   The objective is to minimize a convex combination α ∈ [0, 1] of system cost (weight 1 − α)
and passenger inconvenience (weight α) for the travelers who adopt the system. The fixed cost
of opening bus arc a ∈ A is defined as βa = (1 − α)τa f (a)cbus , which combines the travel time
τa , the number of buses over the time horizon f (a), and the bus cost per hour cbus . The rail
network is assumed to be fixed, and the corresponding constant is omitted from the objective.
Using arc a ∈ A for trip t ∈ T contributes to the objective as follows:
                        
                        p(t) (1 − α)d c̄shuttle + ατ        if m(a) = shuttle
                    t                 a              a
                   γa =                                                                              (1)
                        p(t)α (τ + ω )
                                   a     a                    if m(a) ∈ {bus, rail}.

For shuttles, the distance da is multiplied by the shuttle cost per mile c̄shuttle , the inconvenience
is the travel time τa , and the sum is multiplied by the number of passengers p(t). For the other
modes the only costs are fixed costs, such that γat only consists of the inconvenience τa + ωa ,
which sums the travel time and the waiting time. For shuttles and buses, recall that τa is based
on the congestion scenario. This means that opening bus arcs becomes more expensive, and
using shuttles and buses becomes more inconvenient as congestion increases. Following earlier
work it is assumed that shuttles are readily available and do not impose additional waiting time.
This is motivated by the fact that shuttle waiting times are typically short (Van Hentenryck,
2019; Auad et al., 2021) and are comparable to the time it takes to park a car or walk to a
bus station, which is not penalized either. For a given network design, passengers are always
offered a route that minimizes the objective, but whether they accept this route and adopt the
system depends on their personal preferences. If trip t ∈ T is adopted, this additionally leads
to a benefit of ζ t = (1 − α)p(t)cticket , i.e., the number of tickets multiplied by the price per
ticket. Without loss of generality, the constant revenue from tickets sold to the existing riders
is omitted from the objective.

Optimization Model          The bilevel optimization model by Basciftci and Van Hentenryck
(2023) consists of the leader model (3) and a follower model (4) for every trip t ∈ T . For
brevity, δ + (i) denotes the set of arcs going out of i ∈ V , and δ + (i, bus) further restricts this set
to bus arcs. The sets δ − (i) and δ − (i, bus) are defined similarly for in-arcs. The leader model
uses the binary variables za to decide which bus arcs a ∈ Abus are opened (za = 1) or closed
(za = 0). Constraints (3b) ensure that the bus frequencies are balanced at every hub, and
Constraints (3c) ensure that at most one frequency is selected among parallel bus arcs (recall
that G is a multigraph and may offer multiple frequency options for the same connection).
   The leader anticipates the behavior of follower t ∈ T through a binary variable xt that

                                                   9
                          X                    X              X
                                                       gt +           xt g t − ζ t ,
                                                                                  
                min              βa za +                                                                        (3a)
                x,z
                        a∈Abus              t∈T \T ′          t∈T ′
                            X                             X
                 s.t.                   f (a)za −                     f (a)za = 0          ∀i ∈ VH ,            (3b)
                        a∈δ + (i,bus)               a∈δ − (i,bus)
                                                          X
                                                                          za ≤ 1           ∀i, j ∈ VH ,         (3c)
                                               a∈Abus |i(a)=i,j(a)=j

                                                                          xt = C t (lt )   ∀t ∈ T ′ ,           (3d)
                                                                            t                      ′
                                                                          x ∈B             ∀t ∈ T ,             (3e)
                                                                                                    bus
                                                                          za ∈ B           ∀a ∈ A         ,     (3f)

                where g t and lt are the optimal values to the follower problem:

                                    *                                           +
                                        X                 X
           g t , lt = lex min                 γat yat ,         (τa + ωa )yat       ,                           (4a)
                         yt             a∈A               a∈A
                                                            
                                    X            X          1
                                                                                   if i = o(t)
                                            t            t
                        s.t.               ya −         ya = −1                     if i = d(t)   ∀i ∈ V,       (4b)
                                      +            −
                                                            
                                   a∈δ (i)      a∈δ (i)     
                                                             0                      else
                                                                yat ≤ za                          ∀a ∈ Abus ,   (4c)
                                                          X
                                                                yat ≤ K,                                        (4d)
                                                          a∈A
                                                                yat ∈ B                           ∀a ∈ A.       (4e)


             Figure 4: Bilevel Optimization Model for ODMTS Design with Adoptions


represents the choice function C t (lt ) (Equation (3d)). The choice function equals one if t ∈ T
adopts, and zero otherwise. In particular, it is assumed that travelers adopt if they are offered
                                                                                         t , i.e.,
a path of length lt at most equal to the adoption factor ρ times the travel time by car lcar

                                            C t (lt ) = 1 lt ≤ ρlcar
                                                                 t
                                                                     
                                                                       .                                         (2)

The leader Objective (3a) then sums the fixed cost for opening bus arcs, the cost and inconve-
nience for the existing riders, and the cost and inconvenience including ticket revenue for the
potential riders that adopt (xt = 1).
   Based on the network design z, the follower model (4) finds a path for trip t ∈ T that
minimizes the lexographic Objective (4a). The binary variables yat for a ∈ A define a unit
flow from o(t) to d(t) that represents the path for this trip. Constraints (4b) enforce flow
conservation, Constraints (4c) ensure that arcs can only be used if they are opened by the leader,
and Constraint (4d) enforces the transfer limit. Followers are offered a path that minimizes the
primary objective of cost and inconvenience, and ties are broken by minimizing the secondary
objective of trip length. The corresponding optimal values are denoted by g t and lt respectively.
Note that travelers decide whether to adopt based on the length of the trip lt , while the leaders
minimize a combination of trip lengths and cost.


                                                           10
Solution Method Solving the bilevel model (3)-(4) is computationally challenging for large-
scale instances. For this reason, this paper uses the iterative algorithm arc-S2 by Guan et al.
(2022) to approximate the optimal solution. This algorithm splits the original bilevel framework
into two components: (i) a regular ODMTS network design problem without considering latent
demand and (ii) a choice model to analyze the adoption behavior of the potential riders. The
regular ODMTS network design problems are solved with the Benders-decomposition algorithm
by Auad et al. (2021). After the initial design of the ODMTS, a subset of the bus arcs is
permanently fixed in the optimization, the behavior of the potential riders is analyzed, and the
active set of riders is updated. The ODMTS then undergoes a redesign based on the new set
of riders, and this process is iterated until convergence. The output is an ODMTS network: It
defines bus and rail connections and their frequencies, and it defines which areas are served by
on-demand shuttles.

3.3   Including Dedicated Bus Lanes
It only remains to include DBLs into the ODMTS network design. Recall that the travel time for
congestion scenario k is obtained by scaling the travel time basis with the appropriate congestion
factor. For buses on DBLs, this travel time is simply replaced by the free-flow travel time, after
which the same optimization methods can be used. The travel time basis is not necessarily the
free-flow travel times: the baseline travel times are thus taken from OpenStreetMap (2021).
It should be noted that the congestion scenario and the availability of DBLs are both inputs
to the network design problem, such that the ODMTS delivers the best possible performance
under these circumstances.
    The approach to include DBLs in the network is flexible in the sense that any road or set
of roads can be replaced with DBLs for analysis. The model is also not prescriptive in how the
DBLs are realized, e.g., by using an existing lane or by adding a new lane. This paper focuses
on the impact on the public transit system, but an interesting direction for future research could
be to study the trade-off with car congestion when a regular lane is converted to a DBL. On the
side of ODMTS, previous studies have shown that ODMTS generally reduce the total number
of cars on the road (Auad et al., 2021; Van Hentenryck et al., 2023). Furthermore, increased
traffic on the car lanes favors ODMTS, as the DBLs provide an even larger benefit.


4     Case Study Gwinnett and Atlanta
The case study in this paper focuses on Interstate 85 (I-85) from Gwinnett County to the city
of Atlanta, both in the Metro Atlanta Area. The area is notorious for traffic, and Atlanta
consistently ranks among the most congested cities in the US: After a temporary reduction
in traffic during the COVID-19 pandemic, the city has jumped back to the 10th place on
the list in 2021 (Pishue, 2021). Gwinnett County has almost a million residents, many of
which work in Atlanta and drive the I-85 for their commute. Gwinnett County recognizes the
integral role of transit in the transportation system and published a transit development plan
in 2018 (Gwinnett County, 2018). In 2019, Gwinnett County and the Georgia Department of
Transportation (GDOT) presented a study of I-85 traffic and strategies to alleviate the extreme


                                               11
congestion (Wickert, 2020). However, the Atlanta Journal Constitution reports that Gwinnett
County and GDOT officials are still seeking solutions to reduce congestion on I-85 (Wickert,
2021). This highly congested area serves as an excellent case to study the extent to which
DBLs can improve passenger adoption in ODMTS. Figure 5 visualizes the case study area and
its relation to Gwinnett County. The area is specifically chosen to encompass I-85 and the
immediate surrounding areas, and includes the current commuter routes operated by Gwinnett
County Transit. The markers represent strategic locations that will be used as potential hubs to
design the ODMTS. To clearly demonstrate the effect of congestion, the case study focuses on
the morning rush hour from 7am to 9am and the associated southbound traffic from Gwinnett
to Atlanta.

Current System        The bus transit system in Gwinnett County is operated by Gwinnett
County Transit (GCT). GCT operates seven local bus routes within Gwinnett County and
five commuter routes that connect to DeKalb County (Emory University) and Fulton County
(Midtown Atlanta and Downtown Atlanta). The commuter routes are shown by Figure 6, and
it can be seen that all routes use the I-85. In Atlanta, the buses stop at destinations in Emory
University, Midtown, and Downtown: they connect to the MARTA transit system that is oper-
ated by the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority (MARTA), e.g., at the Civic Center
station. Where available, transit vehicles make use of High Occupancy Toll (HOT) lanes on
the I-85 (Georgia Department of Public Safety, 2022). These lanes are shared with three or
more person carpools and with drivers who pay toll, among other traffic. To isolate the effect
of DBLs, this study compares the situation without HOT lanes to a new situation where the
extra lane is dedicated to buses only.

Existing Ridership This paper uses real transit data to generate a realistic set of trips that
represents the existing ridership. Historical ridership is obtained from the Automated Fare
Collection (AFC) system of GCT. Riders use a transit card known as the Breeze Card to tap
onto the buses. For every tap, the AFC system records card id, time of transaction, type of
transaction, and which reader was tapped. This information is combined with the Automated
Vehicle Location (AVL) system that tracks the buses, and the Automated Passenger Counter
(APC) system that counts boardings and alightings at every stop. Data was collected for the
7am-9am morning peak for April 16-19, 2018. Trip chaining techniques from Barry et al. (2002)
are used to estimate OD pairs. Finally, the trips are sampled from the dataset to obtain a
set of 898 passengers that represent the existing ridership. Together these passengers generate
648 unique OD pairs. The GCT transit data is the most representative and fine-grained data
available for the existing ridership, but it does not track riders beyond their current boarding
and alighting stops. Existing riders may therefore see an additional improvement if they switch
to ODMTS for their full door-to-door commute, eliminating the time it takes to get to and from
the current transit stops.

Potential Riders In addition to existing riders, a set of potential riders is generated: they
may choose to adopt the system if the travel time is sufficiently short. The set of potential riders
is based on simulated travelers in the Metro Atlanta Area provided by the Atlanta Regional

                                                12
Figure 5: Case Study Area (Gray), Gwinnett County (Purple), and Potential Hub Locations (Markers)




                                 Figure 6: GCT Express Routes


                                               13
Commission (2022). This data was generated by an activity-based model, calibrated with data
from the 2011 Regional Houshold Travel Survey, and projected into 2020. This dataset does
not include the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, but Auad et al. (2021) have demonstrated
that ODMTS are generally resilient to changes in demand. To create a set of potential transit
users, travelers are selected from those who

   • commute alone by car from Gwinnett County;

   • depart during the 7am-9am morning peak and stay within the case study area; and

   • commute to the Emory University area, Midtown Atlanta, Downtown Atlanta, or stay
     within Gwinnett.

This results in 33,769 potential riders: 31,295 local riders (who commute within Gwinnett) and
2,474 non-local riders who work outside of the county. The trip origins, which are provided at the
level of traffic analysis zones, are distributed over smaller census blocks based on population
counts. Similarly, the trip destinations are distributed over points of interest based on size,
resulting in 27,202 unique OD pairs. Note that potential ridership is based on simulated demand
from the survey, while existing ridership is based on the current actual demand.

Experimental Settings        The congestion scenarios are created according to Section 3.1, using
Directions API data for 8am on Wednesday March 22, 2022. The MARTA rail system is fixed,
while the GCT buses are redesigned. The ODMTS provides service to 1733 conveniently-placed
virtual stops that span the case study area (chosen from existing transit stops, census block
centers, and points of interest), and the OD pairs are mapped to nearby virtual stops. Figure 5
shows the potential hub locations that are used for the case study. These include hubs near
I-85 (yellow), hubs in Gwinnett (blue), MARTA rail stations (red), and hubs at or near current
GCT commuter bus stops in Atlanta (green).
   Table 2 shows the parameter values used for the ODMTS design, with α, cbus and c̄shuttle
taken from Auad et al. (2021). The bus cost of $72.15 per hour is based on data from Federal
Transit Administration (2018) and Dickens (2020) and consists of salaries and wages ($39.55
per hour), maintenance ($19.17 per hour), and vehicle depreciation ($13.43 per hour). The
shuttle cost per mile is the estimated total cost to serve passengers with a real-time ride-sharing
system. The suggested shuttle cost per mile is multiplied by the congestion factor to capture
the increase in cost due to traffic. Ticket prices are set to follow GCT. Buses are added at a
frequency of 10 buses per hour to maintain the notion of high-frequency connections. It is worth
noting that because buses only serve the busy corridors, ODMTS can operate them at higher
frequencies compared to typical routes. Auad et al. (2021) do not explicitly model bus lines,
and assume that every arc corresponds to a transfer that induces wait time. As bus lines from
Gwinnett to Atlanta play an important role, this paper removes the limit on how many arcs
riders can use (K = ∞) and adds waiting times in a post-processing step, rather than at every
stop. Waiting for a bus or train is assumed to be five minutes, which is a conservative estimate
based on the three-minute expected waiting time and a two-minute buffer for transfers or to get
into a station. Shuttles are assumed to be readily available, as discussed in Section 3.2. The
set of adopting riders is updated accordingly in post-processing.

                                                14
     Parameter    Value
     α            0.1078 (value time at $7.25/hour to match U.S. federal minimum wage).
     cbus         $72.15 per hour.
     c̄shuttle    Basis of $1/mile multiplied by congestion scaling factor.
     cticket      $3.50/trip for local and $5/trip for non-local.
     F bus        {10} buses/hour.
     K            ∞ (no transfer limit).
     ρ            1.5 adoption factor.

                          Table 2: ODMTS Parameters for Case Study


    The ODMTS network design problem with adoptions is solved with the iterative algorithm
arc-S2 by Guan et al. (2022), which is implemented in Python 3.7. In every iteration, the
algorithm calls the Benders-decomposition algorithm by Auad et al. (2021) to solve an ODMTS
network design problem for fixed demand. The Benders-decomposition algorithm is imple-
mented in C++ and uses CPLEX 12.9 to solve (mixed-integer) linear programs.


5    Impact of Congestion on ODMTS
This section studies the impact of congestion on ODMTS. For each of the congestion scenarios,
an ODMTS is designed to deliver optimal performance in that scenario, and it is analyzed how
these systems differ in service quality and cost. This analysis also serves as the baseline for
studying the impact of DBLs in Section 6.

Network Designs       Figure 7 presents the ODMTS network designs, optimized under the dif-
ferent congestion scenarios. The lines in the Southwest represent the Red, Gold, Blue, and
Green lines of the MARTA rail system. The lines with arrows (gray) show the bus arcs that are
opened by the optimization model, where the thickness of the line corresponds to the number
of travelers that use this arc. Finally, the thin lines (green) indicate which connections are
served by on-demand shuttles. It is striking that none of the designs feature a bus connection
on the I-85 from Gwinnett to Atlanta. This corridor is so congested that the ODMTS transfers
passengers to rail at Chamblee and Doraville stations rather than provide a direct bus connec-
tion to the city. In the expected and 50-50 scenarios, there is a bus service that connects the
rail to Emory University. Under the pessimistic scenario, this bus also disappears in favor of
serving a small number of people by shuttles. The overall designs look similar for the different
scenarios, but the ODMTS increases its reliance on shuttles as congestion increases: the total
shuttle distance increases from 62k miles for the expected scenario, to 66k miles for the 50-50
scenario, and 72k miles for the pessimistic scenario.

Travel Time and Adoption         Figure 8 zooms in on the travel time and adoption of non-local
travelers, who are most likely to be affected by congestion. Congestion has a major effect on
the existing riders: travel time increases from 64 minutes under the expected scenario to 86
minutes under the pessimistic scenario. While the number of existing riders is fixed, potential
riders adopt the ODMTS if the travel time is not too long compared to driving. Surprisingly,

                                               15
             (a) Expected Scenario                                (b) 50-50 Scenario




                                      (c) Pessimistic Scenario

           Figure 7: ODMTS Designs without DBLs under Three Congestion Scenarios


Figure 8 shows an increase in adoption when congestion increases, despite the increase in travel
time. This is due to the fact that travel time by car is also negatively impacted, making transit
a more favorable option. There is 52% adoption of potential non-local riders under the expected
scenario (1279 people), which increases to 72% under the pessimistic scenario (1770 people).
Local riders are less affected by congestion, but show similar trends. Travel time for existing
riders increases from 23 minutes under the expected scenario to 33 minutes under the pessimistic
scenario, while the adoption rate increases from 61% to 66% of the potential riders (from 19,013
to 20,646 riders). The high adoption rates suggest that ODMTS may significantly improve
access to transit and may compete with commuting by car for a variety of congestion levels.

Congestion To get a better understanding of how congestion affects system operations, Fig-
ure 10 displays the scaling factors for the roads used by the ODMTS. For the expected scenario
(Figure 10a) the average scaling factors for roads used by shuttles and buses are Rshuttle = 0.78
and Rbus = 0.89, respectively. These are averages over the arcs, weighted by distance. In the
pessimistic scenario (Figure 10b) these scaling factors go up significantly to Rshuttle = 1.13 and

                                                16
                                                       Figure 9: Baseline ODMTS System Costs
Figure 8: Baseline Travel Times (left axis) and
Counts (right axis) for Non-local Riders




             (a) Expected Scenario                                (b) Pessimistic Scenario

     Figure 10: Baseline ODMTS Congestion Scaling Factors of Used Roads (darker is higher)


Rbus = 1.17. It is important to note that these networks are designed while taking congestion
into account. That is, the optimal designs avoid the extremely congested I-85 and distribute
the remaining burden of traffic about equally over the shuttles and the buses. As congestion
increases, substituting buses for shuttles makes this possible.

System Cost Figure 9 details the cost and revenue of the ODMTS under the different sce-
narios. Ridership increases with congestion, which leads to a small increase in revenue. The
costs increase at the same time, mainly because of the increased travel time for buses and
shuttles. Shuttle costs play the most prominent role, making up 79% to 85% of the total cost.
The bus costs stay relative constant because the ODMTS increases its reliance on shuttles as
congestion increases. Figure 9 also indicates that the ODMTS is profitable for the first two
scenarios, but has a net cost of $0.42 per person in the pessimistic scenario. However, note
that traditional transit systems are often heavily subsidized, where the ODMTS almost breaks
even while serving more than 20k additional passengers and providing better access to transit.
Furthermore, Auad et al. (2021) show that a stricter budget can be enforced by reducing the


                                                  17
number of on-demand shuttles at the cost of a relatively small increase in waiting time.


6    Impact of Dedicated Bus Lanes
The previous section has shown that without DBLs, congestion has a major impact on ODMTS
travel times. This section studies to what extent DBLs can mitigate these negative effects, even
when shuttles are still affected by traffic. The impact of DBLs is assessed by opening a DBL on
I-85, reoptimizing the networks, and evaluating their performance. The ODMTS with DBLs is
compared to the baseline in terms of design, travel times, passenger adoption, and cost of the
system. Finally, this section explores how adoption changes with the adoption factor ρ.

Network Redesigns with DBLs            Figure 11 presents the ODMTS network redesigns that are
optimized to leverage the DBLs (indicated by dashed lines). As a major change from the baseline
ODMTS, the ODMTS with DBLs now include buses traveling south on I-85 from Gwinnett to
Atlanta for all scenarios. This corridor was too congested to be used in the baseline, but the
thick dashed lines in Figure 11 indicate that riders now benefit extensively from these new
bus connections. The local network within Gwinnett is similar across the scenarios, and also
similar to the baseline. Recall that the baseline sees a substitution effect of buses for shuttles
when congestion increases. This effect largely disappears as the important bus lanes are no
longer affected by congestion (shuttle mileages are 65k, 66k, and 67k for the three scenarios,
respectively). Overall the new networks suggest a major improvement for non-local travelers,
and similar service for local travelers.

Travel Times and Adoption Tables 3 and 4 support the view that DBLs bring significant
benefits to non-local travelers while local service levels remain high. The tables separate adopted
riders into those who would adopt even without DBLs (PreDBL) and those who would only
switch to ODMTS if DBLs are implemented (PostDBL). Table 3 shows huge improvements
for non-local travelers in terms of both travel time and adoption. Without DBLs, existing
riders are expected to spend 64 minutes in the ODMTS, compared to 47 minutes by car. With
DBLs, the average ODMTS travel time goes down to only 43 minutes and becomes faster than
driving. This is possible because the buses are able to avoid traffic. PreDBL and PostDBL
adopters also benefit from significantly improved travel times compared to ODMTS without
DBLs. For example, PostDBL riders would have an average travel time of 107 minutes if they
use ODMTS without DBLs, which reduces to only 60 minutes when DBLs are implemented. In
fact, DBLs are so effective that the travel times under the pessimistic scenario are better than
the expected scenario without DBLs. This is strong evidence that DBLs can mitigate the effects
of congestion, even when shuttles are still affected by traffic.
    The lower travel times for non-local riders result in a significantly increased adoption rate.
For the expected scenario, the increase is 32 percentage point (from 52% to 84%), and for
the pessimistic scenario it increases from 72% to 93%. This suggests that, in a congested
environment, DBLs are able to attract almost all potential riders that can benefit from the
traffic-free lane. Table 5 provides additional information on the mode distribution of the non-
local adopters. Without DBLs, the only viable option is to take a shuttle to a bus station, take

                                                18
             (a) Expected Scenario                                     (b) 50-50 Scenario




                                       (c) Pessimistic Scenario

             Figure 11: ODMTS Designs with DBLs under Three Congestion Scenarios

                                       Expected               50-50             Pessimistic
                                     No DBL     DBL     No DBL        DBL    No DBL         DBL
         Bus                           0         1         0           1         0           1
         Bus and Rail                   4        5         6           4         5            4
         Shuttle and Bus               0        674        0          754        0          876
         Shuttle, Bus, and Rail       1275      1398      1687        1394     1765         1426
         Total                        1279      2078      1693        2153     1770         2307

                 Table 5: Mode Distribution for Non-local Adopted Potential Riders


the bus to Chamblee or Doraville station and transfer to the rail. With DBLs, it becomes viable
to directly take the bus to Atlanta rather than take a detour by rail, and this attracts a significant
number of additional riders. Using the rail is still popular but, rather than transferring at
Chamblee or Doraville station, riders get on the rail in Midtown Atlanta to complete the last
mile.


                                                  19
                                          Ridership                          Average Travel Time (minutes)
                      Existing                   Adoption                  Car                 ODMTS
 Scenario      DBL     Count     Count    Rate     PreDBL      PostDBL   Existing   Existing   PreDBL   PostDBL
               No       806      1,279     52%          -         -        47         64         70       70
 Expected
               Yes      806      2,078     84%        1,263      815       47         43         54       47
               No       806      1,693     68%          -         -        59         75         79       85
 50-50
               Yes      806      2,153     87%        1,665      488       59         44         56       53
               No       806      1,770     72%          -         -        71         86         88       107
 Pessimistic
               Yes      806      2,307     93%        1,752      555       71         52         61        60

                        Table 3: Adoption and Travel Times for Non-local Riders

                                          Ridership                          Average Travel Time (minutes)
                      Existing                   Adoption                  Car                 ODMTS
 Scenario      DBL     Count     Count    Rate     PreDBL      PostDBL   Existing   Existing   PreDBL   PostDBL
               No       92       19,013    61%         -          -        10         20         11       31
 Expected
               Yes      92       19,091    61%      17,942      1,149      10         18         11       19
               No       92       19,706    63%         -          -        13         23         14       35
 50-50
               Yes      92       19,266    62%      18,121      1,145      13         22         14       21
               No       92       20,646    66%         -          -        15         28         16       48
 Pessimistic
               Yes      92       19,618    63%      18,295      1,323      15         25         16       31

                          Table 4: Adoption and Travel Times for Local Riders


   Non-local riders receive the most benefit from DBLs, but Table 4 shows that these im-
provements do not come at the expense of local transit users. Existing local riders see a small
improvement in average travel time (up to 3 minutes in the pessimistic scenario), and the travel
times for PreDBL adopters are more or less constant. Adoption of the ODMTS stays high, with
over 60% of potential riders adopting in all cases. However, there is some decrease in adoption
when DBLs are implemented in the 50-50 scenario (63% to 62%) and in the pessimistic scenario
(66% to 63%). On the other hand, the DBL redesign also brings in new riders by significantly
lowering their average travel time by up to 17 minutes in the pessimistic case. Overall the
service level for the local travelers is comparable between the baseline and the DBL redesign,
while the service level for non-local travelers improves significantly.

System Cost          Table 6 shows how DBLs impact the cost of the system. As congestion in-
creases, DBLs become more useful compared to the baseline, and the table shows bigger invest-
ments in buses. For example, in the expected scenario, the redesign increases the shuttle cost
by $3k while the bus cost remains the same. In the pessimistic scenario, on the other hand,
investing $4k into buses allows the shuttle cost to be reduced by $7k, leading to a lower total
cost. For the expected scenario and the 50-50 scenario, the increase in revenue balances out the
increase in cost, resulting in only $0.03 difference in net profit per rider. For the pessimistic
scenario, the lower system cost results in a savings of $0.10 per passenger. As a result, DBLs
are effective in reducing travel times and increasing adoption without negatively affecting sys-
tem cost. At the same time, DBLs do not resolve the issue that system cost increases with
congestion, as depicted in Figure 12. However, it is worth repeating that traditional transit


                                                          20
                                               Cost
  Scenario      DBL      Ridership    Total   Bus     Shuttle   Revenue   Net Profit per Rider
                No        20,292     $ 61k    $ 13k   $ 48k      $ 77k           $ 0.76
  Expected
                Yes       21,169     $ 64k    $ 13k   $ 51k      $ 82k           $ 0.79
                No        21,399     $ 77k    $ 14k   $ 63k      $ 82k           $ 0.20
  50-50
                Yes       21,419     $ 79k    $ 16k   $ 63k      $ 83k           $ 0.17
                No        22,416     $ 95k    $ 14k   $ 81k      $ 85k          -$ 0.42
  Pessimistic
                Yes       21,925     $ 92k    $ 18k   $ 74k      $ 85k          -$ 0.32

                                   Table 6: ODMTS System Costs


systems tend to be heavily subsidized, where the ODMTS almost breaks even when serving 20k
additional passengers.




                           Figure 12: ODMTS with DBLs System Costs



6.1   Sensitivity Analysis on Adoption Factor
This section analyzes how changing the adoption factor affects adoption by potential riders.
Recall that the adoption factor ρ is used in the choice model to decide whether travelers adopt
the ODMTS: Potential riders adopt the system if the ODMTS travel time is at most ρ times the
travel time by car. Figure 13 shows the different adoption rates for non-local potential riders
when the network is designed for different scenarios and different adoption factors ranging from
ρ = 1.4 (less willing to adopt) to ρ = 1.6 (more willing to adopt). Even without DBLs, adoption
rates are typically high (above 50%) across scenarios and adoption factors. However, this is not
the case for the expected scenario with adoption factor ρ = 1.4: Relatively low congestion
favors driving by car. This, combined with less willingness to adopt the ODMTS, results in an
adoption rate closer to 20%. Introducing DBLs in this situation has a major effect on adoption,


                                                21
                      (a) Expected Scenario                (b) 50-50 Scenario




                                      (c) Pessimistic Scenario

              Figure 13: ODMTS Adoption Percentages for Non-local Potential Riders


which climbs to above 60%. This demonstrates the effectiveness of DBLs in attracting non-local
riders.
    Figure 14 explains why DBLs are so effective in increasing adoption. It considers the net-
works designed for ρ = 1.5 and shows the ratio of ODMTS to car travel times for all non-local
potential riders under the different scenarios. In other words, it shows the actual ratio that the
potential riders observe, where riders adopt if the ratio is at most ρ = 1.5. These curves are very
steep. For example, in the expected scenario without DBLs ridership quickly increases around
the 1.5 cut-off. Including DBLs makes the ODMTS more competitive and moves the curves to
the left, resulting in a sharp increase in adoption, especially when adoption was previously low.




7    Conclusion
This paper studied the effect of congestion on ODMTS and to what extent Dedicated Bus Lanes
(DBLs) can improve rider adoption. To enable this study, the paper introduced a method to
create realistic congestion scenarios without querying all origin-destination pairs by combining
data from multiple sources. Designing the ODMTS was modeled as a bilevel optimization
problem in which potential riders choose whether to adopt the system based on the quality of
the trip offered. These methods were then applied to perform a comprehensive case study in the
Metro Atlanta Area, based on real data by Gwinnett County Transit and the Atlanta Regional
Commission.
    The case study revealed that, even with significant traffic, ODMTS is able to provide acces-
sible transit, experiences high adoption, and almost breaks even in terms of cost. That being
said, Interstate 85 from Gwinnett to Atlanta is so congested that the ODMTS avoids using this


                                                22
         Figure 14: Ratio of ODMTS to Car Travel Times for Non-Local Potential Riders


corridor at all. Instead passengers are transfered to take a detour through the rail system and
experience long travel times. The congestion is not isolated to the highways, and slower shuttle
trips are a major source of increasing costs as congestion increases.
   The paper then studied the case where DBLs were added to the network and the ODMTS
was reoptimized to benefit from the congestion-free lanes. The new networks feature buses on
I-85 that are used extensively by riders. Non-local travel sees huge improvement in terms of
travel time and ODMTS adoption. In fact, DBLs are so effective that the travel times under the
pessimistic scenario are better than the expected scenario without DBLs. These improvements
do not come at the expense of local travel, which sees a service similar to the baseline. While
system costs still increase with congestion, DBLs do not contribute negatively to the operating
cost.
   This case study shows that DBLs may significantly increase ODMTS adoption. Future
work should compare the benefit of DBLs in ODMTS across different cities, since Atlanta is a
particularly congested city relying heavily on its highway system. Within various cities, studies
may also involve scenarios with different bus transit frequencies and different sets of existing
riders. Another direction for future research may be to improve the modeling of bus transit
wait times to more accurately assess travel times.


Acknowledgments
This research is partly supported by NSF LEAP-HI proposal NSF-1854684.


References
Atlanta Regional Commission, 2022. Activity Based Modeling. https://atlantaregional.



                                               23
  org/transportation-mobility/modeling/modeling/.

Auad, R., Dalmeijer, K., Riley, C., Santanam, T., Trasatti, A., Van Hentenryck, P., Zhang, H.,
  2021. Resiliency of On-Demand Multimodal Transit Systems During a Pandemic. Transporta-
  tion Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 133, 103418. 10.1016/j.trc.2021.103418.

Auad, R., Van Hentenryck, P., 2022. Ridesharing and Fleet Sizing For On-Demand Multimodal
  Transit Systems. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 138, 103594. 10.
  1016/j.trc.2022.103594.

Auld, J., Hope, M., Ley, H., Sokolov, V., Xu, B., Zhang, K., 2016. POLARIS: Agent-based
  modeling framework development and implementation for integrated travel demand and net-
  work and operations simulations. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies
  64, 101–116. 10.1016/j.trc.2015.07.017.

Barry, J.J., Newhouser, R., Rahbee, A., Sayeda, S., 2002. Origin and Destination Estimation in
  New York City with Automated Fare System Data. Transportation Research Record 1817,
  183–187. 10.3141/1817-24.

Basciftci, B., Van Hentenryck, P., 2020. Bilevel Optimization for On-Demand Multimodal Tran-
  sit Systems, in: Hebrard, E., Musliu, N. (Eds.), Integration of Constraint Programming, Arti-
  ficial Intelligence, and Operations Research. Springer, 52–68. 10.1007/978-3-030-58942-4_
  4.

Basciftci, B., Van Hentenryck, P., 2023. Capturing Travel Mode Adoption in Designing On-
  demand Multimodal Transit Systems. Transportation Science 57, 351–375. 10.1287/trsc.
  2022.1184.

Basso, L.J., Guevara, C.A., Gschwender, A., Fuster, M., 2011. Congestion pricing, transit
  subsidies and dedicated bus lanes: Efficient and practical solutions to congestion. Transport
  Policy 18, 676–684. 10.1016/j.tranpol.2011.01.002.

Ben-Dor, G., Ben-Elia, E., Benenson, I., 2018. Assessing the Impacts of Dedicated Bus Lanes on
  Urban Traffic Congestion and Modal Split with an Agent-Based Model. Procedia Computer
  Science 130, 824–829. 10.1016/j.procs.2018.04.071.

Campbell, J.F., Ernst, A.T., Krishnamoorthy, M., 2005. Hub Arc Location Problems: Part
  I–Introduction and Results. Management Science 51, 1540–1555. 10.1287/mnsc.1050.0406.

Chakraborty, S., Rey, D., Levin, M.W., Waller, S.T., 2021. Freeway network design with
  exclusive lanes for automated vehicles under endogenous mobility demand. Transportation
  Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 133, 103440. 10.1016/j.trc.2021.103440.

Chen, X., Lin, X., He, F., Li, M., 2020. Modeling and control of automated vehicle access on
  dedicated bus rapid transit lanes. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies
  120, 102795. 10.1016/j.trc.2020.102795.




                                              24
Dalmeijer, K., Van Hentenryck, P., 2020. Transfer-Expanded Graphs for On-Demand Multi-
  modal Transit Systems, in: Hebrard, E., Musliu, N. (Eds.), Integration of Constraint Pro-
  gramming, Artificial Intelligence, and Operations Research. Springer, 167–175. 10.1007/
  978-3-030-58942-4_11.

Dickens, M., 2020. Public Transportation Vehicle Database. American Public Transportation
  Association.

Federal Transit Administration, 2018. National Transit Database.

Georgia Department of Public Safety,        2022.        I-85 Express Lanes (HOT Lanes).
  https://dps.georgia.gov/divisions/motor-carrier-compliance-division/
  i-85-express-lanes-hot-lanes.

Georgia Department of Transportation, 2022. Traffic Analysis and Data Application. https:
  //gdottrafficdata.drakewell.com.

Google Maps Platform, 2022. The Directions API Overview. https://developers.google.
  com/maps/documentation/directions/overview.

Guan, H., Basciftci, B., Van Hentenryck, P., 2022.        Heuristic Algorithms for Integrating
  Latent Demand into the Design of Large-Scale On-Demand Multimodal Transit Systems.
  arXiv:2212.03460.

Gwinnett   County,    2018.     Comprehensive        Transit   Development   Plan.     https:
  //www.gwinnettcounty.com/static/departments/transportation/pdf/Connect_
  Gwinnett_Recommendations_Report_102518.pdf.

Hoonsiri, C., Chiarakorn, S., Kiattikomol, V., 2021. Using Combined Bus Rapid Transit and
  Buses in a Dedicated Bus Lane to Enhance Urban Transportation Sustainability. Sustain-
  ability 13, 3052. 10.3390/su13063052.

Mahéo, A., Kilby, P., Van Hentenryck, P., 2019. Benders Decomposition for the Design of a
  Hub and Shuttle Public Transit System. Transportation Science 53, 77–88. 10.1287/trsc.
  2017.0756.

OpenStreetMap, 2021. Planet dump retrieved from https://planet.osm.org.

Pinto, H.K.R.F., Hyland, M.F., Mahmassani, H.S., Verbas, I.Ö., 2020. Joint design of mul-
  timodal transit networks and shared autonomous mobility fleets. Transportation Research
  Part C: Emerging Technologies 113, 2–20. 10.1016/j.trc.2019.06.010.

Pishue, B., 2021. Global Traffic Scorecard. INRIX.

Russo, A., Adler, M.W., van Ommeren, J.N., 2022. Dedicated bus lanes, bus speed and traffic
  congestion in Rome. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 160, 298–310.
  10.1016/j.tra.2022.04.001.




                                             25
Salazar, M., Rossi, F., Schiffer, M., Onder, C.H., Pavone, M., 2018.        On the Interaction
  between Autonomous Mobility-on-Demand and Public Transportation Systems, in: 2018
  21st International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), 2262–2269.
  10.1109/itsc.2018.8569381.

Socially Aware Mobility Lab, 2020. How On-Demand Multimodal Transit Works. https:
  //sam.isye.gatech.edu/videos.

Tsitsokas, D., Kouvelas, A., Geroliminis, N., 2021. Modeling and optimization of dedicated bus
  lanes space allocation in large networks with dynamic congestion. Transportation Research
  Part C: Emerging Technologies 127, 103082. 10.1016/j.trc.2021.103082.

U.S. Census Bureau, 2021. Annual Estimates of the Resident Population for Counties: April 1,
  2020 to July 1, 2021. County Population Totals: 2020-2021.

Van Hentenryck, P., 2019. On-demand mobility systems can ease commuters’ burdens – Socially
  aware transit solutions focus on solving ‘first/last mile’ challenge. ISE Magazine 51, 28–33.

Van Hentenryck, P., Riley, C., Trasatti, A., Guan, H., Santanam, T., Huertas, J.A., Dalmeijer,
  K., Watkins, K., Drake, J., Baskin, S., 2023. MARTA Reach: Piloting an On-Demand
  Multimodal Transit System in Atlanta. arXiv:2308.02681.

Wickert, D., 2020. Is there a fix for I-85 traffic? The Atlanta Journal-Constitution.

Wickert, D., 2021. Gwinnett, Georgia DOT seek solutions for I-85 traffic. The Atlanta Journal-
  Constitution.




                                              26
