      A potential demand model for a multi-circulation feeder network design


Saeed Sani1, Mehdi Ghatee1
1
    Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Amirkabir University of Technology, Tehran, Iran
Coredponding Author e-mail: saeedsani@aut.ac.ir




               Abstract

Background: The development of public transit network can enhance the efficiency
of the system as well as raise interest to use the system. Feeder bus service fills the
area that is far from the railway system; therefore, designing a feeder network in a gap
area causes the expansion of the main transit network.

Purpose: To present a modified potential demand model for designing a multi-
circulation feeder network.

Materials and Methods: In this study, the potential demand is defined based on the
traffic demand of each section related to each link, the average walking distance of
passengers to specified links, the distance from the links to stations, and finally
potential demand of accessing each main station for each link. A labelling method is
used to create continuous circular and separated routes. After generating an initial
solution using a constructive heuristic algorithm, a genetic algorithm was operated to
solve the problem. In the second algorithm, each route is considered a gene, and each
network is considered a chromosome. In fact, in this step, different routes from
diverse solutions are combined as a unique feeder network. Tehran District 10 was
selected as the case study and the model was tested on this area which is located near
the central business districts. A machine learning approach has been applied to
estimate the missing values of the related database.

Results: By running the algorithm, four feeder routes were obtained with reasonable
travel times and distances of 4.8, 5.5, 5.8, and 8.1 km, starting and ending at the same
railway station. Moreover, 98% of the area was covered by resulted feeder network
with a maximum access distance of 300m.

Conclusion: What stands out from this method is that the combination of the
modified feeder route design model and algorithms is feasible.

Index Terms: Operation research, Optimization, Public network transportation,
Feeder network design
   1. Introduction

    Over the last century, urban transit network has noticeably developed in the world,
particularly in big cities. In fact, many societies have faced an urban sprawl and
inefficiency of public transit which caused some issues, such as high transit times, the
tendency to use private cars and taxis, air pollution, increasing stress-related as well as
respiratory-related diseases. So, to sort out these problems, experts and researchers are
led to make public transit networks (PTN) more connected and easily accessible to
attract more commuters to this network. One of the most significant characteristics of
attracting more users is the accessibility to PTN which can potentially be considered
for vulnerable people, especially elderly ones. Covering gaps by expanding the feeder
network can propel us to a more efficient PTN. In other words, the feeder network
could fill both residential areas and business districts and reduced walking distances
and travel times. In many cities, underground railways and BRT are integrated to form
an urban transit system. Both of them include stations which are the base of designing
feeder routes. Then, choosing which station is more effective to allocate to a feeder
route is a considerable aspect of cutting down the average travel time. In this paper,
we use the term feeder bus and stop to make difference with vehicles and stations in
the main network. Stops locating is resulted by population density and coverage of
sections in a similar way as stations. Besides saving more time, feeder routes are more
likely to meet the travel demand of residents..

   The potential demand for feeder bus services, the distance between road and rail
transit and the repetition factor of road bus lines are considered to establish a potential
demand model for feeder route designing. Then the model was tested in a selected
area in Shanghai (Zhu et al. 2017).

    Ceder has designed a model with consideration to population density rate and
maximum access time constraints of one feeder route to the system with an objective
function of access rate (Ceder 2016). Kuah and Perl presented a heuristic model for
designing a feeder-bus network to access an existing rail system which is considered
under two different demand patterns, many-to-one (M-to-1) and many-to-many (M-to-
M) (Kuah and Perl 1989). Martins has reported computing solutions for Feeder Bus
Network Design Problem. The model which is a non-linear and non-convex mixed
integer problem is aimed at minimizing a cost function including both passenger and
operator interests (Martins and Pato 1998). Sze nee has represented a model for
designing feeder routes with demand rate, frequency in requirement services and
constraint length of each route with the objective function of passengers' costs and
operator's cost (NEE 2004). Chandran et al take overall distances of travel in objective
function in a VRP model with paying attention to capacity (Chandran and Raghavan
2008). Chien has represented an algorithm for designing feeder routes with
consideration to demand rate, headways and services frequency. The target of this
algorithm is to minimize the overall cost (I-Jy Chien 2005). Zhi-Chun Li et al have
presented analytical models for optimizing a bus and rail transit system with feeder
bus services by aiming optimization the frequencies and fares of the bus, rail and
feeder bus services (Li, Lam and Wong 2009). Xiugang Li et al have developed an
analytical model by assuming high demands and long length of the service area and a
two-vehicle operation for each zone (Li and Quadrifoglio 2011). Martínez and Eiró
have designed a routing model for feeder services in which the demands of entrance
and exit scheduling to each stop and costs are considered in the objective function
(Martínez and Eiró 2012). Hu et al analyzed the characteristics of urban rail transit
and conventional buses. Passengers' distribution time, travel distance, walking time,
waiting time and operational speeds have been assumed to construct a model for the
layout region of feeder buses (Hu, Zhang and Wang 2012).

    Saadia Tabassuma used the Gini coefficient and other methods to evaluate the
existing feeder modes available for BRT System. Route reliability, travel time, travel
cost, comfort, safety and security environmental aspects are considered as main
factors in calculating Travel impedance (Tabassum et al. 2017).
Chandra and Quadrifoglio used a new street connectivity indicator to predict transit
performance. The role of street network connectivity in service quality level has been
identified for prediction (Chandra and Quadrifoglio 2013). Park et al have represented
an optimization approach to designing feeder bus routes based on a neural network-
based embedding methodology which is applied to real-time taxi GPS data. This
approach is aimed to contribute to a reduction in traffic during rush hours (Park, Lee
and Sohn 2019). Guo et al represented a bi-objective optimization model which
considered the maximization of travel demand, as well as the minimization of travel
distance; then, the exact-constraint method is used to generate Pareto optimal
solutions (Guo et al. 2019). Deng et al have considered minimization of passenger
travel cost and transit operating cost to represent a model for designing the feeder-bus
network. Passenger travel cost includes bus waiting cost, accurate bus riding cost,
transfer cost between buses, trains and rail riding cost. Also, a new genetic algorithm
for determining optimal feeder-bus operating frequency has been presented (Deng et
al. 2014). CHEN et al proposed a robust model by mixing driver's mode choice as
well as route choice based on a combination of user equilibrium and cross nest logit.
Travel time uncertainty on roads and multi-class demands is the main contributions
which are considered in this research (Chen et al. 2017). Almasi et al proposed a
strategy for designing transit networks. They have used an integrated multi-modal
transit model in order to design a better combination of different mode transit systems
(Almasi et al. 2018).
    Lee et al developed an algorithm for optimal flexible feeder bus routing by
considering the relocation of buses for multiple stations and trains, minimizing the
total cost and limiting the maximum degree of circuity for each passenger (Lee et al.
2019). Ramos et al presented a model to solve the waste collection routing problem.
This model takes into account the maximization of waste collection along with the
minimization of transport costs (Ramos, de Morais and Barbosa-Póvoa 2018). Huang
et al represented a new network design optimization model for the responsive
customized bus (CB) problem. The model is two-phased: dynamic and static by
considering inserting passenger requests dynamically in an interactive manner and
optimizing the service network statically based on the overall demand respectively
(Huang et al. 2020).

                         Table1. Characteristics of obtained feeder routes.

    In many cases, researchers have concentrated on designing one feeder route which
is connected to the main route station. So, covering a vast area by more than one
feeder route is another problem that cannot be met by these kinds of models. In this
paper, we introduce a model for designing feeder routes in an area with more
accessible PTN stations. In fact, the model is capable of optionally choosing the more
effective stations and allocating appropriate feeder routes to them. This model is the
expansion of a route design model of feeder bus service which used potential demand
values to optimize the problem (Zhu et al. 2017). By using three-dimensional
variables -two indexes for specifying connected stops and one index for routes- and
new connection constraints -guaranteeing the connectivity of each route- we can
design a multi-routes feeder network. In addition, not only have we altered the
structure of Zhu's model to make the model capable of designing more routes, but we
set a new method to calculate potential demand values which is more efficient than the
last one.



   2. Mathematical Model

      2.1. Model Construction

   In this paper, we use potential demand values to strengthen links which are
candidates for being a part of feeder routes. Traffic demand of the area straightly and
the average walking distance of commuters inversely both affect the measure of
potential demand value for each link. The Significance of connecting a link to each
PTN station is another influential value, so the distance from a link to the main
network station and the demand for accessing the main network station have
noticeable impacts on potential demand. Considering these characteristics, the
potential demand for a link to be used in a feeder route –allocating to the PTN station
s- can be calculated as

                                            =

                                                       1            2
                 ⎧1                                   ≤ max        + min
                 ⎪                                     3            3
                          1          2                 2            1
                = 2         max     + min       <     ≤ max        + min
                 ⎨        3          3                 3            3
                 ⎪                                     2            1
                 ⎩3                                   > max
                                                       3
                                                                   + min
                                                                    3

     is the potential demand of link ( , ) operating feeder route which is allocated
to PTN station .

     is the traffic demand of link ( , ).

   is the average walking distance of passengers to link ( , ).

   is the distance from the link ( , ) to the PTN station .

    is the demand for reaching PTN station      from link ( , ).

    specifies the level of demand from link ( , ) for reaching PTN station .

   In order to calculating     , first, for each ( , ) the set of     ∈ is divided
into three portions based on the quantities of members. Then, we set 1, 2 and 3 to
lower, middle and upper level respectively. Using the exponential function is due to
significance of reducing the whole travel times in the expanded network.

   Zhu's model designs a one-route feeder network by potential demand values, in
which internal characteristics are considered for the calculation of these values.
However, our model designs a multi-route network with taking into account users'
destinations in the main network to calculating potential demand values (some areas
may conceivably require more than one route to be covered efficiently and allocating
each route to more appropriate station plays an integral role). In this paper, it is
presumed the same assumption about dividing the traffic zone as the mentioned
research (Zhu et al. 2017).

    The graph = ( , ) shows the set of links and nodes in the study area (Ceder
2016). We assign = ′⋃ in which S is the set of all PTN stations and ′ is the set
of other nodes within the area. Depending on the study area, one or more circular
feeder routes will be resulted from solving the model. Every resulted feeder route
starts from a PTN station and ends at it. Labelling each node helps the model to obtain
unique, circular feeder routes. The model maximizes the potential demand of
commuters, satisfying the constraints of allocating each link to a PTN station,
maximum travel distance and making a closed loop. Based on these needs, the model
can be achieved as

                                                     ×                                      (1)
                            ( , )∈   ∈


                    :                                          =0          ∀ ∈                     (2)
                                             ∈ ′ ∈       { }


                                     −               =0        ∀ ∈   ,∀ ∈             (3)
                        ∈                ∈


                                                ≤                                     (4)
                        ∈ ′ ∈        ∈


                                         ×       ≤             ∀ ∈                    (5)
                        ∈      ∈

                                                                            ′         (6)
                               ×         −     −1 = 0 ∀ ∈            , ∈        , ∈

                             =0                                ∀ ∈                    (7)

                               ∈ {0,1}                         ∀( , ) ∈ , ∀ ∈         (8)

                 0≤          ≤ ( )                                  ∀ ∈                      (9)

    Constraint (2) guarantees that the feeder route should be allocated to the main
network station . Equation (3) is constraint of creating a circular route in the network.
Constraint (4) represents the constraint of the maximum number of feeder lines.
Constraint (5) limits the maximum travel time. Equations (6) and (7) are constraints of
labelling all nodes of the feeder routes which guarantee that the feeder routes are
connected to the main network stations. If a feeder route passes from a node, the main
network station also joins it. Constraints (8) and (9) also specify the type of decision
variables. Equation (8) is the definition of    , where     = 1 indicates that link ( , )
is a part of the feeder route and otherwise       = 0.

   In this new model, potential demand is considered as a main value which adverts
users' destinations, and this is more likely to make more efficient connections between
stops and stations. Furthermore, by using special constraints, this model can design a
multi-route network simultaneously in order to form a more effective feeder network.
Heuristic and meta-heuristic algorithms are appropriate to solve the model.

    Solving this NLP model results in, depending to area, one or several closed,
circular feeder routes connecting to the railway network. Besides decreasing access
time to the main network, reducing the operating cost is considered in the model.
Moreover, reduction of travel time through the network is attended in model by new
calculation of potential demand.

   In addition, we can transform this model into a LP model. It is possible by using
(10) and (11) instead of equation (6).

Theorem. Following constraints function as constraint (6) in the proposed model,
where ℬ is a big number.
                                                                                 ′
                          ℬ×            +    −       −1 ≤ ℬ          ∀ ∈   , ∈       , ∈       (10)

                                                                                     ′
                          ℬ×            −(   −       − 1) ≤ ℬ        ∀ ∈   , ∈           , ∈       (11)

Proof. ∀ ∈ , ∈ ′ , ∈ , if             ×                          −    − 1 = 0, then                  = 0 or     −   −
1) = 0. There are three possibilities:

I)     = 0,           −           − 1 ≠ 0.

II)    −       − 1 = 0,                  = 1.

III)       = 0,           −        − 1 = 0.

Let        = 0 and                 −     − 1 ≠ 0 then ℬ ×                  +     −         −1=            −   −1 ≤ ℬ,
and ℬ ×           −           −        −1 =−               −     − 1 ≤ ℬ.

Also, Let         −        − 1 = 0 and                     = 1 then ℬ ×          +         −        − 1 = ℬ ≤ ℬ , and
ℬ×         −          −       − 1 = ℬ ≤ ℬ.

Moreover if               = 0 and                −     − 1 = 0 then ℬ ×                    +        −     −1=0≤ℬ,
and ℬ ×           −           −        − 1 = 0 ≤ ℬ.
                              ′
Thus ∀ ∈        , ∈               , ∈    which             ×     −     − 1 = 0, (10) and (11) are correct.
                                                       ′
On the other hand, ∀ ∈ , ∈                                 , ∈   , if ℬ ×            +         −     − 1 ≤ ℬ and ℬ ×
   − ( − − 1) ≤ ℬ, then

  ℬ×    + − − 1 ≤ ℬ → − − 1 ≤ ℬ(1 −     )
 ℬ×  − ( − − 1) ≤ ℬ → −( − − 1) ≤ ℬ(1 −   )

Obviously, there are two conditions:

I)     = 0.

II)    = 1.
Let       = 0 then      ×        −       −1 =0×                    −       − 1 = 0.

We assume that         = 1, it follows that

                                     −       −1≤ℬ 1−                        =0
                             −       −       −1 ≤ℬ 1−                        = 0.

So,

                                              −        −1≤ 0
                                         −     −       −1 ≤0

We obtain      −     − 1 = 0 therefore             ×               −       −1 =         × 0 = 0.

Hence, ∀ ∈ , ∈ ′ , ∈ which ℬ ×                             +           −    − 1 ≤ ℬ and ℬ ×        −(   −
  − 1) ≤ ℬ, constraint (6) is correct.



        2.2. Solution Algorithm

   The represented feeder route design model is an NP-hard problem with one-
dimensional and three-dimensional variables. Depending on the size of the study area,
a large-scale problem may be needed to be generated. The number of variables and
constraints are ( ) ( ) + ( ′ ) and ( ) ( ′ ) ( ) + ( ) ( ) + 3 ( ) + 1
respectively. For instance, a problem with 50 stops and 10 stations has 36050
variables and 30631 constraints. So, using some heuristic algorithms is a faster way to
solve this proposed operation research problem. Using constructive heuristic
algorithms for solving VRP and GVRP can produce some initial solutions (Pop et al.
2011). Then, by performing a genetic algorithm, with a multi-parent crossover which
uses a diversity operator, obtaining a good answer can be achievable (Elsayed, Sarker
and Essam 2014). In this step, we use a function to produce three offspring by three
parents with the replacement of routes in parents:
                                              = (      ,       ,       )

                                              = (      ,       ,       )

                                              = (      ,       ,       )

where
                                                                                        ′
                      =      ∈ ,         =         ,           ,…,                  ∈

Finding     is as follows:
1:     =
                                          ′                     ")                    ′
2:          ℎ      ∈                ℎ         >           ℎ(         ℎ         =

3: ( ,     ′   ,   ") =

Also we perform a mutation step for each offspring by a improvement heuristic
algorithm (Pop et al. 2011).
                       Figure1. Flowchart for the proposed algorithm to solve the problem.

    After producing new solutions, they should be checked for the model's constraints
satisfaction; subsequently, the best solution -with the highest amount of objective
function- can be gained. Like other works, this model considers different crucial
aspects such as travel demand, walking distance, travel time and route numbers to
reduce the number of the required fleet. In this model, the priority is satisfying users
to reach their destinations in a shorter time. Using a new mixed algorithm to solve the
problem leads us to reach better solutions in a short time.

   The model and solution algorithm have been implemented on a simple network
with 21 stops, and 4 main network stations. After having generated 6 initial solutions,
we produced 100 generations using the algorithm. Finally, the best solution has been
selected with the biggest amount of objective function (3154120.5) and three feeder
routes.
                                Table2. Characteristics of obtained feeder routes.


                              Figure2. Obtained feeder routes for a simple network.



     3. Experimental Results

        3.1. Data Preparation

   In this article, we used a statistical database of Tehran Municipality, and we aimed
the Tehran district 10 as the case study. Calculation of the potential demands for
modelling the data needs different characteristics' values which are not completely
clear in the mentioned database. Tackling this problem and completing missing
values, we used a novel machine learning tool and developed random forest and local
least squares (DRFLLS). This method applies seven categories for estimation of the
optimal number of missing values' neighbourhoods; then, the local least squares
method is used to estimate the missing values (Al-Janabi and Alkaim 2020).

   The traffic demand of each link, the average walking distance of passengers to
each link, the distance from each link to each PTN station, the demand for reaching
each PTN station from each link, population density in the specified neighbourhood of
each link, the average age of people in the specified neighbourhood of each link, and
the housing density in the specified neighbourhood of each link are used as the
features which have been applied to estimating the missing values by DRFLLS.
Clearly, applying more related features from an accessible database may conceivably
make better approximations.

       3.2. Method Performance and Results

   By using MATLAB software in a computer (CPU :core i7, RAM: DDRIII 8GB),
we have performed aforementioned algorithm to solve the proposed model for Tehran
district 10; in addition, total time for solving was 90.28 second. This Genetic
Algorithm by using 30 initial parents and generating 100000 generations found a
unique solution (second offspring from generation 19956) with the biggest amount of
objective function (1.9099e+07).

   Moreover, we ran the algorithm on three other samples, with benchmark and
randomized initial solutions, and compared them based on various aspects.
               Table3. Comparing results of four different samples solved by the algorithm.

             Figure3. Resemblance between final answer and initial solutions for four samples.

    Figure 3 (drawn by specifying similar links between best answer and initial
solutions, and calculating the centers of gravity) shows the amount of resemblance
between best answers and initial parents in four samples. Also, the black circles in the
big circle depict the best answers, and the black circles on the big circles'
circumferences display initial solutions. The size of each black circle indicates the
magnitude of its objective function.

   These charts reveal the importance of initial solutions, as well as their impacts on
finding appropriate final answers. In fact, they represent how much of the initial
networks' structures have been used by the algorithm to form the final feeder
networks.



   4. Case Study

   The proposed model is implemented in Tehran district 10 with 4 underground and
9 BRT stations at the north, east and south. This area is the house of about 327,000
people, making the area much more significant to connecting to public transit
network. The test area was divided to grids with the size of 100m×100m.
   By considering traffic demand in each link, calculating      by the formula Zhu used
(Zhu et al. 2017), shortest path distances between links and stations and calculating
    , the matrix of     was obtained.        is gained by finding      calculated by the
data of Origin-Destination travels statistics. We assume        =        to half the scale
of calculation.   depends on the length of link ( , ), traffic level between node and
  and the average speed and stopping time of the feeder bus. Maximum traveling time
of each feeder bus has been set to = 45 min. Also, maximum number of the feeder
routes has been considered to = 5 in this area.

   The actual, accurate road network of Tehran District 10 has been used to test the
suggested model. We used MATLAB software to solve the mathematical model by
mentioned algorithms. The Final solution is a four-route network in lengths of 4.8,
5.5, 5.8, and 8.1 km. Figure 4 shows the obtained feeder network, opting one BRT and
three underground railway stations as destinations. As it is clear in figure 5, the
resulted feeder network has covered more than 98% of the area with maximum access
distance of 300m. Another significant result is the rates of  in following table.
      Table4. Three levels of satisfied demand from links for reaching PTN stations in final feeder network.

                                       Figure4. Proposed feeder network.

                Figure5. Gap (painted in black) in the area after introducing new feeder network.



   5. Conclusion

    This study has focused on the expansion of the public transport network by filling
gap areas. With a strongly connected PTN which covers the urban area, accessibility
to the system will raise; subsequently, this will increase the interest in using the public
transit system. In fact, this trend can potentially decrease travel time, cost of living in
big cities, city costs, air pollution, fuel consumption, traffic jams and traffic accidents.
Using feeder services is an economical and efficient solution to this problem.
Therefore, designing an appropriate feeder network for gap areas can effectively
develop the whole system. In this paper, we proposed a mathematical model, based on
potential demand, to design feeder routes with various optional stations. In this model,
different levels of interest for reaching each main station from different links have
been considered, as well as we used labelling to ensure the connectivity between
stations and routes. Then, we introduced a multi-parent crossover genetic algorithm to
solve the model, in which initial parents are generated by a VRP algorithm. Tehran
District 10 was selected as this paper's case study. The related database included some
missing values in which they were estimated using a machine learning method along
with considering seven features to obtain a more decent approximation. After
generating the model by genetic algorithm, a four-route feeder network was obtained.
The accessibility rose from about 12% in the area without feeder routes to over 98%
with the resulted network. Also, almost two-fifths of links have been connected to
stations with an upper level of interest. The results show that the origin-destination
travel time is momentous, and selecting a proper station and a railway line can cut off
transfers number and travel times of commuters. In brief, considering all travel
demands, including out of regional and intra-regional travels, should be studied for
designing a multi-circulation feeder network.

   For future work, it is intended to extend this model for designing the whole public
transit network in a city and expand the model for design networks in disaster
management.



      References
Al-Janabi, Samaher and Ayad F Alkaim. 2020. "A Nifty Collaborative Analysis to Predicting a Novel
         Tool (Drflls) for Missing Values Estimation." Soft Computing 24(1):555-69.
Almasi, Mohammad Hadi, Ali Sadollah, Yoonseok Oh, Dong-Kyu Kim and Seungmo Kang. 2018.
         "Optimal Coordination Strategy for an Integrated Multimodal Transit Feeder Network Design
         Considering Multiple Objectives." Sustainability 10(3):734.
Ceder, Avishai. 2016. Public Transit Planning and Operation: Modeling, Practice and Behavior: CRC
         press.
Chandra, Shailesh and Luca Quadrifoglio. 2013. "A New Street Connectivity Indicator to Predict
         Performance for Feeder Transit Services." Transportation Research Part C: Emerging
         Technologies 30:67-80.
Chandran, Bala and Saahitya Raghavan. 2008. "Modeling and Solving the Capacitated Vehicle
         Routing Problem on Trees." Pp. 239-61 in The Vehicle Routing Problem: Latest Advances and
         New Challenges: Springer.
Chen, Xinyuan, Zhiyuan Liu, Dongsheng Hua and Inhi Kim. 2017. "A New Model for Rail-Based Park-
         and-Ride with Feeder Bus Services." Transp. Res. Procedia 21:79-86.
Deng, Lianbo, Qiang Zeng, Wenliang Zhou and Feng Shi. 2014. "The Effect of Train Formation Length
         and Service Frequency on the Determination of Train Schedules." Proceedings of the
         Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part F: Journal of Rail and Rapid Transit 228(4):378-88.
Elsayed, Saber M, Ruhul A Sarker and Daryl L Essam. 2014. "A New Genetic Algorithm for Solving
         Optimization Problems." Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 27:57-69.
Guo, Xiaole, Rui Song, Shiwei He, Sijia Hao, Lijie Zheng and Guowei Jin. 2019. "A Multi-Objective
         Programming Approach to Design Feeder Bus Route for High-Speed Rail Stations." Symmetry
         11(4):514.
Hu, Yucong, Qi Zhang and Weiping Wang. 2012. "A Model Layout Region Optimization for Feeder
         Buses of Rail Transit." Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences 43:773-80.
Huang, Di, Yu Gu, Shuaian Wang, Zhiyuan Liu and Wenbo Zhang. 2020. "A Two-Phase Optimization
         Model for the Demand-Responsive Customized Bus Network Design." Transportation
         Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 111:1-21.
I-Jy Chien, Steven. 2005. "Optimization of Headway, Vehicle Size and Route Choice for Minimum
         Cost Feeder Service." Transportation Planning and Technology 28(5):359-80.
Kuah, Geok Koon and Jossef Perl. 1989. "The Feeder-Bus Network-Design Problem." Journal of the
         Operational Research Society 40(8):751-67.
Lee, Young-Jae, Mana Meskar, Amirreza Nickkar and Sina Sahebi. 2019. "Development of an
         Algorithm for Optimal Demand Responsive Relocatable Feeder Transit Networks Serving
         Multiple Trains and Stations." Urban Rail Transit 5(3):186-201.
Li, Xiugang and Luca Quadrifoglio. 2011. "2-Vehicle Zone Optimal Design for Feeder Transit Services."
         Public Transport 3(1):89.
Li, Zhi-Chun, William HK Lam and SC Wong. 2009. "Optimization of a Bus and Rail Transit System with
         Feeder Bus Services under Different Market Regimes." Pp. 495-516 in Transportation and
         Traffic Theory 2009: Golden Jubilee: Springer.
Martínez, Luis M and Tomás Eiró. 2012. "An Optimization Procedure to Design a Minibus Feeder
         Service: An Application to the Sintra Rail Line." Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences
         54:525-36.
Martins, Carlos Lucio and Margarida Vaz Pato. 1998. "Search Strategies for the Feeder Bus Network
         Design Problem." European journal of operational research 106(2-3):425-40.
NEE, KUAN SZE. 2004. "Applying Metaheuristics to Feeder Bus Network Design Problem."
Park, Chung, Jungpyo Lee and So Young Sohn. 2019. "Recommendation of Feeder Bus Routes Using
         Neural Network Embedding-Based Optimization." Transportation Research Part A: Policy and
         Practice 126:329-41.
Pop, Petrică Claudiu, Ioana Zelina, Vasile Lupşe, Corina Pop Sitar and Camelia Chira. 2011. "Heuristic
         Algorithms for Solving the Generalized Vehicle Routing Problem." International Journal of
         Computers Communications & Control 6(1):158-65.
Ramos, Tânia Rodrigues Pereira, Carolina Soares de Morais and Ana Paula Barbosa-Póvoa. 2018.
         "The Smart Waste Collection Routing Problem: Alternative Operational Management
         Approaches." Expert Systems with Applications 103:146-58.
Tabassum, Saadia, Shinji Tanaka, Fumihiko Nakamura and Ariyoshi Ryo. 2017. "Feeder Network
         Design for Mass Transit System in Developing Countries (Case Study of Lahore, Pakistan)."
         Transportation research procedia 25:3129-46.
Zhu, Zhenjun, Xiucheng Guo, Jun Zeng and Shengrui Zhang. 2017. "Route Design Model of Feeder
         Bus Service for Urban Rail Transit Stations." Mathematical Problems in Engineering 2017.
Tables



                           Table1. Characteristics of obtained feeder routes.

                                                   Decision      Travel Demand        Optimization
         Article              Objective
                                                  Variables         Pattern             Method
                            Maximize the          Bus route         Based on
  (Kuah and Perl 1989)    demand potential           and          demand nodes     A heuristic algorithm
                          of the route links      frequency        (bus stops)
                                                  Bus route         Based on       A combined building
   Martins and Pato )     Minimize the total
                                                     and          demand nodes        plus improving
         (1998                 time
                                                  frequency        (bus stops)     heuristic procedure,
                                                  Bus route         Based on
                          Minimize the total
      (NEE 2004)                                     and          demand nodes     A heuristic algorithm
                               time
                                                  frequency        (bus stops)
                                                                                   An integrated method
                                                                    Based on
                          Minimize the total      Bus route                          considering both
   (I-Jy Chien 2005)                                              demand nodes
                                cost              and fleets                          analytical and
                                                                   (bus stops)
                                                                                   numerical techniques
                            Maximize the
                                                                  Based on route
      (Ceder 2016)        demand potential        Bus route
                                                                      links
                          of the route links
                                                                     Based on
     Chandran and )       Minimize the total
                                                  Bus route       demand nodes     A heuristic algorithm
    (Raghavan 2008            distance
                                                                   (bus stops)
                                                                     Based on
  Li, Lam and Wong )      Minimize the total      Bus route
                                                                  demand nodes     A heuristic algorithm
         (2009                  cost              and fleets
                                                                   (bus stops)
                                                                     Based on
  Li and Quadrifoglio )   Minimize the total
                                                  Bus route         residential    A heuristic algorithm
         (2011                  cost
                                                                      zones
                                                                     Based on
  Martínez and Eiró )     Minimize the total      Bus route
                                                                  demand nodes     A heuristic algorithm
        (2012                 distance            and fleets
                                                                   (bus stops)
 Hu, Zhang and Wang )     Minimize the total                                          A represented
                                                  Bus route
        (2012                  time                                                    algorithm
                                                                    Based on
     Chandra and )          Minimize the
                                                  Bus route       demand nodes     A heuristic procedure
   (Quadrifoglio 2013         distance
                                                                   (bus stops)
                           Minimize the total
                                                                      An elastic
                            passenger travel        Bus stop
                                                                    demand based
  (Deng et al. 2014)          expense and            location
                                                                    on time period
                           maximize the total       and route
                                                                      in an area
                            operating profit
                             Maximize the
                                                                    Based on route
  (Zhu et al. 2017)          summation of           Bus route                            A genetic algorithm
                                                                        links
                             travel demand
                                Minimize
                                                                      Based on
                           weighted features
(Tabassum et al. 2017)                              Bus route       demand nodes
                               (cost, time,
                                                                     (bus stops)
                               comfort,...)
                                                                                                A two-stage
                              Minimize the                          Based on route
  (Chen et al. 2017)                                Bus route                                    algorithm
                               travel time                              links
                                                    Bus route         Based on
                           Minimize the total                                                 A meta-heuristic
 (Almasi et al. 2018)                                  and          demand nodes
                                 cost                                                            approach
                                                    frequency        (bus stops)
 Ramos, de Morais )
                                Minimize             Vehicle          Based on
 and Barbosa-Póvoa
                              transport cost          route         demand nodes
       (2018
                                                                          Based on
Park, Lee and Sohn )         Maximize the                                                A branch-and-bound
                                                    Bus route            residential
       (2019                cosine similarity                                                 algorithm
                                                                           zones
                              Minimize the
                                                    Passenger                                 A meta-heuristic
   (Lee et al. 2019)         travel time and
                                                     serving                                     approach
                                   cost
                                                    Bus route
                                                       and            Based on
                             Maximize the
 (Huang et al. 2020)                               request-to-      demand nodes          Heuristic methods
                           operator’s revenue
                                                     vehicle         (bus stops)
                                                    variable


                             Table2. Characteristics of obtained feeder routes.


    Feeder route                                                     1             2            3

    Length                                                         6 km           6 km        6 km

    Number of covered stops                                          6             9            6

    Summation of potential demands for each route ≈              1166940       1221951    765230


               Table3. Comparing results of four different samples solved by the algorithm.

Sample                  The number of        The number of            Best answer         Running time
                        initial parents      generations                                  (second)
Randomized 1                     15               100000                  1.3305e+07           50.17
Randomized 2                     10               100000                  1.3663e+07           34.51
Benchmark 1                      30               100000                  1.9099e+07           90.28
Benchmark 2                      15               100000                  1.5130e+07           48.66
     Table4. Three levels of satisfied demand from links for reaching PTN stations in final feeder network.

    The level of connection between each link           Percentage of links connected to stations
    and main station
    Upper level                                                                40%
    Middle level                                                               28%
    Lower level                                                                32%




Figures
Figure1. Flowchart for the proposed algorithm to solve the problem.
Main network station

Stop

Road

Feeder route
    Figure2. Obtained feeder routes for a simple network.
   Randomized 1                                      Randomized 2




    Benchmark 1                                       Benchmark 2
Figure3. Resemblance between final answer and initial solutions for four samples.
Figure4. Proposed feeder network.
Figure5. Gap (painted in black) in the area after introducing new feeder network.
